Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Sanjay Karol, Abhay S. Oka
                                                      1
2023 INSC 693                                                            REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL 3142 OF 2010
             GOVERNMENT OF KERALA & ANR.                             …APPELLANTS
                                                      Versus
             JOSEPH AND OTHERS                                       …RESPONDENTS
                                              JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.,
1. This appeal assails a judgement and order passed by the High Court of Kerala dated 5th August,
2009 in Second Appeal No.740 of 1995 by which the findings returned in the First Appeal dated 3rd
April, 1995, by the District Judge, Thodupuzha, in Appeal Suit No. 3 of 1991 were overturned and
the land, subject matter of dispute, was stated to be Indu Marwah Date: 2023.08.09 15:42:44 IST
Reason:
rightfully belonging to the Respondents herein, namely Joseph, by virtue of the
principle of adverse possession.
Background
2. The property, subject matter of dispute, measures 30 cents bearing survey Nos.545/7/1, 545/8A2
and 545/8B3 of Kudayathoor village. The said property is stated to be Government Puramboke land.
Such fact appears to be undisputed. The case put forward by the respondents, (claimants of adverseGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 1possession)1 against which the present appeal stands filed, is that Joseph had acquired title to the
land of which he had been in possession and in continued enjoyment of, since 1940.
3. The Tahsildar, District Thodupuzha, issued notice to the claimants for unauthorised occupation of
Government land on 20th February 1982, and thus began the long-standing litigation that is before
us. Joseph-the original occupier passed away on 9th August 1982. The Assistant Collector, Idukki,
vide order dated 11th March 1983 dismissed the appeal filed against the order of the Tahsildar.
Hereafter referred as Claimants.
4. Legal representatives of the claimants filed a suit for injunction on 14th April 1983. The Court of
the Munsiff allowed the suit on 31st July 1987 and on remand, vide order dated 16th December,
1989 from an appeal filed by the State, on the ground of the non-opportunity of production of
evidence as also cross-examination of the witnesses for the State, confirmed its original decree with
a judgement and order dated 21st July 1990.
First Appeal
5. The question, the Court in its wisdom framed for its consideration was whether the plaintiffs
(respondents herein) had made out a case for declaration and injunction and whether the decree
passed by the Court below was sustainable or not.
5.1 It was observed that the injunction was clearly a response to the notice dated 3rd of May, 1982,
therefore, it was hit by Section 20 of the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, 19572. The Act permits only
those suits which are filed against an order under the said act in respect of lands that 2 Hereinafter,
The Act do not belong to the Government or are not puramboke land. The same was also hit by the
Proviso to Section 20 which permits such suits to be filed within one year of the date of notice. In
this regard, the notice in the present case was issued on 22nd February, 1982 and the suit was filed
on 14th April, 1983 thereby being outside the permissible limit of one year.
5.2 It was observed that the witnesses produced by the plaintiffs were “rendering lip-service to the
plaintiffs” and their testimonies in respect of the age of the trees planted on the disputed property
varied greatly. No independent witness(es) or commission was taken to prove the age of the
improvements made. A report relied on by the plaintiffs, takes note of improvements made on the
disputed property, over 35 years ago and neither the report nor the person who prepared such
report was before the Court. 5.3 Furthermore, it was observed that the plaintiffs could not adduce
any evidence to prove their possession of the disputed property for more than the statutory period of
30 years. As per the of testimony of PW 1, the plaintiffs were residing on the land on the south of the
disputed property before 1940. However, no other record was taken to prove the possession of the
plaintiffs over the Government property. 5.4 It was observed that the title of the Government on
land cannot be lost by placing reliance on “casual advertence” or on the basis of “scanty material”. It
was then held that the classic requirement of adverse possession is that possession should be open,
assertive, hostile and continuous. These requirements were absent in the case. Lastly it was held
that just because it appears that the order of the Assistant Collector appears to have been passed as
if Avira (son of Joseph, respondent herein) was alive, even though the legal representatives appliedGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 2to be impleaded, it could not be expected of quasi-judicial authorities to follow the procedure for
amendment of cause title with the same rigidness as observed by the Civil Court and that those
seeking to be impleaded owed a duty to satisfy the Court as to what became of their application for
impleadment. Just because the order has been presumedly passed against a person no longer in the
world of living, does not give the representatives of the plaintiffs (respondents herein) to treat the
same as nullity. 5.5 In such terms, the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court dated 21st
July, 1990 was set aside vide judgment and order dated 3rd April, 1995.
Second Appeal-The Impugned Judgement
6. The learned Court below in its judgement dated 5th August, 2009 examined the decisions that led
to the appeal before it and held that the lower Appellate Court’s approach stating that the suit was
barred by virtue of the Act was not a good law, as the suit filed by the respondents herein was a suit
for declaration of perfected title by virtue of adverse possession and not, a challenge against the
notice issued by the Tahsildar. The second aspect on which the High Court differs with the lower
Appellate Court was on the point that the testimony of PWs1 to 6 stood unshaken.
6.1 It was observed that the Tahsildar, shorn of any basis had estimated the period of encroachment
as 16 years as against the claim of 40 years. It was then held that on perusal of evidence as also other
facts regarding the improvements in the property showed that the encroachment was done long
before the L.C. proceedings in the suit. 6.2 It was concluded that the finding of there being no scope
of adverse possession being given to the respondents herein is fallacious and is based on erroneous
consideration of evidence. In that event, they would be entitled to the relief of adverse possession
upon land which, as it stands recorded in the impugned judgement, they have been in possession for
over 50 years.
6.3 In that view of the matter, the judgement of the Munsiff Court was upheld, granting the
claimants adverse possession over the land in question and, overturning the judgement rendered by
the Court of First Appeal.
Consideration By This Court
7. In deciding the present dispute, this Court must examine the same from two angles. One, whether
the Judgement impugned, arising out of Second Appeal meets the established criteria for Second
Appeal or not?; and two, whether the respondents herein are entitled to the relief of adverse
possession or is the claim so made, barred by the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, 1957?
8. For an appeal to be maintainable under Section 100, Code of Civil Procedure (‘CPC’, for brevity) it
must fulfil certain well- established requirements. The primary and most important of them all is
that the appeal should pose a substantial question of law. The sort of question that qualifies this
criterion has been time and again reiterated by this Court. We may only refer to Santosh Hazari v.
Purushottam Tiwari3 (three-Judge Bench) wherein this Court observed as follows :Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 3“12. The phrase “substantial question of law”, as occurring in the amended Section
100 is not defined in the Code. The word substantial, as qualifying “question of law”,
means — of having substance, essential, real, of sound worth, important or
considerable. It is to be understood as something in contradistinction with —
technical, of no substance or consequence, or academic merely. However, it is clear
that the legislature has chosen not to qualify the scope of “substantial question of
law” by suffixing the words “of general importance” as has been done in many other
provisions such as Section 109 of the Code or Article 133(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The substantial question of law on which a second appeal shall be heard need not
necessarily be a substantial question of law of general importance.
…
14. A point of law which admits of no two opinions may be a proposition of law but
cannot be a substantial question of law. To be “substantial” a question of law must be
debatable, not previously settled by law of the land or a binding precedent, and must
have a material bearing on the decision of the case, if answered either way, insofar as
the rights of the parties before it are concerned. To be a question of law “involving in
the case” there must be first 3 (2001) 3 SCC 179 a foundation for it laid in the
pleadings and the question should emerge from the sustainable findings of fact
arrived at by court of facts and it must be necessary to decide that question of law for
a just and proper decision of the case.
An entirely new point raised for the first time before the High Court is not a question involved in the
case unless it goes to the root of the matter. It will, therefore, depend on the facts and circumstance
of each case whether a question of law is a substantial one and involved in the case, or not; the
paramount overall consideration being the need for striking a judicious balance between the
indispensable obligation to do justice at all stages and impelling necessity of avoiding prolongation
in the life of any lis.” (Emphasis supplied) The principles laid down herein stood recently reiterated
in Chandrabhan v. Saraswati4 (two-Judge Bench).
9. A perusal of the judgement impugned does not reflect any question of law, either substantial or
“involving in the case” to have been framed by the Court in the Second Appeal. The Section 100, CPC
jurisdiction is not akin to the jurisdiction conferred under Section 96 of CPC wherein it is open for
the Court to consider both questions of fact and law. This jurisdiction is exercisable only when the
Court is convinced that the dispute at hand involves a substantial question of law, and proceeding
under this jurisdiction sans framing questions of such nature renders the proceedings to be 4 2022
SCC OnLine SC 1273 “patently illegal.” [Umerkhan v. Bismillabi5 (two-Judge Bench)
10. Recently, a Bench of two learned Judges in Singaram v. Ramanathan6 held as under :
“This is undoubtedly subject to various well known exceptions which, however,
cannot permit the Second Appellate Court to interfere with the findings of fact as a
matter of course. Such restrictions are placed on the High Court in order that there isGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 4finality to litigation at a particular level in the hierarchy of Courts. The limitation on
the exercise of power by the High Court in the Second Appeal interfering with the
judgment of the First Appellate Court is premised on high public policy. This
limitation is sought to be secured by insisting upon the requirement that a Second
Appeal is considered only when there is a substantial question of law. Therefore, the
existence of substantial question of law and the judgment which revolves around
answering the substantial questions of law are not mere formalities. They are meant
to be adhered to.” (Emphasis supplied)
11. In view of the principles laid down in the above stated judgements, the impugned judgement
must be faulted with for not complying with the well-established contours of Section 100, CPC.
12. We have hitherto observed that the instant litigation has continued for a considerable period of
time, i.e., four decades. Prudence would not be served by sending this matter back to the court
below for consideration in light of the above 5 (2011) 9 SCC 684 discussion and, therefore, with an
aim to put an end to the matter, this Court proceeds to examine the claim of adverse possession on
its own merits, as is so argued across the bar.
13. Thus, this Court is required to consider as to whether the claimants have perfected their title
over the property, subject matter of dispute, by adverse possession.
14. It is contended by the State that a question of adverse possession does not arise, on two grounds
– one, that the land is undisputedly Government land and two, that the respondents had possession
of such land only for a period of 15 years which is less than required period of 30 years, after which
adverse possession could be claimed against the State. Further, it is submitted that Section 20 of the
Act bars any suit or other legal proceedings against the Government in respect of any action taken
by it under this Act in respect of unauthorised occupation of land, and, since the notice which
initiated the present proceedings under the instant act, the proceedings that it gave rise to, were
barred by law.
15. The provision reads as under-
“20. Saving of suits by persons aggrieved by proceedings under this Act- No suit against the
Government shall be entertained in any civil Court in respect of any order passed under this act
except upon the ground and in respect of which such order has been passed is not and which is the
property of government whether a poramboke or not.
Provided that civil courts shall not take cognizance of any such suit has it shall be instituted within
one year from the date on which the cause of action arose.”
16. The Court of First Appeal records that the instant litigation is barred by the above stated
provision of law as the suit for injunction had been filed in a manner of retaliation against the notice
issued by the Tehsildar. The Second Appellate Court, per contra, records that the suit was not a suit
for injunction but a suit for declaration of title, same having come to rest upon the respondentsGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 5herein by virtue of adverse possession and, therefore, the above provision would not impede the
proceedings.
17. A reading of the provision barring the jurisdiction of civil suits in respect of proceedings initiated
under the act, reveals the following ingredients for such a bar to apply :
  i)     no suit in any Civil Court;
  ii)    in respect of any order under this Act;
iii) the only ground upon which such a suit would be entertained is if the notice issued is in regards
of property that does not belong to the Government;
iv) the entertainment of a suit under the exception described in point No.(iii) is also circumscribed
by the time limit of one year from the date of cause of action.
18. Applying the above-identified ingredients to the facts of the present case, for the bar to apply the
civil suit instituted would have to be against an order passed by the competent authority under this
Act in respect of unauthorised occupation of Government land. A perusal of the record shows that
the original notice dated 3rd August,1982 was appealed before the Collector, Idduki, who dismissed
the same. No challenge to the said order of dismissal was filed by the legal representatives of Avira.
The recourse to the law that was taken, was in fact a suit for declaration before the Civil Court filed
on 14th April, 1983 seeking a permanent injunction against any proceedings in respect of eviction
and also possession and title of the land in question. The third ground i.e., the disputed property
being a Government property, is the only ground that is met. The same is an undisputed fact.
19. However, the primary requirement of the civil suit being in connection with an action taken by
the Government, remains unmet and therefore, on the basis of the third ground alone, the bar
enshrined in this Section cannot be applied to the present case. Whether or not the respondents
herein have any right over the above stated Government land is a question that is required to be
considered independently.
20. The principle of adverse possession has been defined by the Privy Council in Perry v. Clissold7 in
the following terms:
“It cannot be disputed that a person in possession of land in the assumed character of
the owner and exercising peaceably the ordinary rights of ownership has a perfectly
good title against all the world but the rightful owner. And if the rightful owner does
not come forward and assert his title by the process of law within the period
prescribed by the provisions of the statute of Limitation applicable to the case, his
right is forever extinguished and the possessory owner acquires an absolute title.”
21. Before proceeding to do so, it is essential to take note of the law governing such a claim. After a
perusal and consideration of various judgements rendered by this Court, the following principlesGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 6can be observed :
21.1 Possession must be open, clear, continuous and hostile to the claim or possession
of the other party; all three classic requirements must coexist- nec vi, i.e., adequate in
continuity; nec clam, i.e., adequate in publicity; and nec 7 [1907] A.C. 73 precario,
i.e., adverse to a competitor, in denial of title and knowledge;
(a) In Radhamoni Debi v. Collector of Khulna8, the Privy Council held that-
“The possession required must be adequate in continuity, in publicity, and in extent to show that it
is possession adverse to the competitor.”
(b) Further, the Council Maharaja Sri Chandra Nandi v.
Baijnath Jugal Kishore9 observed-
“It is sufficient that the possession should be overt and without any attempt at concealment, so that
the person against whom time is running ought, if he exercises due vigilance, to be aware of what is
happening.”
(c) A Bench of three judges of this Court in Parsinni v.
Sukhi10 held that “Party claiming adverse possession must prove that his possession must be ‘nec vi,
nec clam, nec precario’ i.e. peaceful, open and continuous. The possession must be adequate, in
continuity, in publicity and in extent to show that their possession is adverse to the true owner.”
(d) In Karnataka Board of Wakf v. Govt. of India (two- Judge Bench)11 it was held:-
“It is a well-settled principle that a party claiming adverse possession must prove that
his possession is 8 1900 SCC OnLine PC 4 9 AIR 1935 PC 36 10 (1993) 4 SCC 375 11
(2004) 10 SCC 779 “nec vi, nec clam, nec precario”, that is, peaceful, open and
continuous. The possession must be adequate in continuity, in publicity and in extent
to show that their possession is adverse to the true owner. It must start with a
wrongful disposition of the rightful owner and be actual, visible, exclusive, hostile
and continued over the statutory period.” This case was relied on in the case of M.
Venkatesh v.
Bangalore Development Authority12 (three-Judge Bench), Ravinder Kaur Grewal v. Manjit Kaur13
(three-Judge Bench).
(e) This Court in a recent case of M Siddiq (D) through LRs v. Mahant Suresh Das & Ors.14
(five-Judge Bench) reiterated this principle as under -Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 7“748. A person who sets up a plea of adverse possession must establish both possession which is
peaceful, open and continuous - possession which meets the requirement of being ‘nec vi nec claim
and nec precario’. To substantiate a plea of adverse possession, the character of the possession must
be adequate in continuity and in the public because the possession has to be to the knowledge of the
true owner in order for it to be adverse. These requirements have to be duly established first by
adequate pleadings and second by leading sufficient evidence.” 21.2 The person claiming adverse
possession must show clear and cogent evidence substantiate such claim; 12 (2015) 17 SCC 1 13
(2019) 8 SCC 729 14 (2020) 1SCC 1 This Court in Thakur Kishan Singh v. Arvind Kumar15
(two-Judge Bench) held that -
“5. A possession of a co-owner or of a licensee or of an agent or a permissive possession to become
adverse must be established by cogent and convincing evidence to show hostile animus and
possession adverse to the knowledge of real owner. Mere possession for howsoever length of time
does not result in converting the permissive possession into adverse possession…” Reference may
also be made to M. Siddiq (supra). 21.3 Mere possession over a property for a long period of time
does not grant the right of adverse possession on its own;
(a) In Gaya Prasad Dikshit v. Dr. Nirmal Chander and Anr. (two-Judge Bench)16, this court
observed- “1… It is not merely unauthorised possession on termination of his licence that enables
the licensee to claim title by adverse possession but there must be some overt act on the part of the
licensee to show that he is claiming adverse title. It is possible that the licensor may not file an
action for the purpose of recovering possession of the premises from the licensee after terminating
his licence but that by itself cannot enable the licensee to claim title by adverse possession. There
must be some overt act on the part of the licensee indicating assertion of hostile title. Mere
continuance of unauthorised possession even for a period of more than 12 years is not enough.” 15
(1994) 6 SCC 591 16 (1984) 2 SCC 286 Reference may also be made to Arvind Kumar (supra);
Mallikarjunaiah v. Nanjaiah17 (two-Judge Bench); Uttam Chand (supra).
21.4 Such clear and continuous possession must be accompanied by animus possidendi - the
intention to possess or in other words, the intention to dispossess the rightful owner; in Karnataka
Board of Wakf (supra) it was observed-
“…Physical fact of exclusive possession and the animus possidendi to hold as owner in exclusion to
the actual owner are the most important factors that are to be accounted in cases of this nature…”
(a) The case of Annakili v. A. Vedanayagam18 (two-Judge Bench) also shed light on this principle as
under -
“24. Claim by adverse possession has two elements:
(1) the possession of the defendant should become adverse to the plaintiff; and (2)
the defendant must continue to remain in possession for a period of 12 years
thereafter. Animus possidendi as is well known is a requisite ingredient of adverse
possession. It is now a well-settled principle of law that mere possession of the landGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 8would not ripen into possessory title for the said purpose. Possessor must have
animus possidendi and hold the land adverse to the title of the true owner.
For the said purpose, not only animus possidendi must be shown to exist, but the same must be
shown to exist at the commencement of the possession…” 17 (2019) 15 SCC 756 18 (2007) 14 SCC
308
(b) In Des Raj and Others v. Bhagat Ram19 (two- Judge Bench) this Court observed -
“21. In a case of this nature, where long and continuous possession of the plaintiff-respondent
stands admitted, the only question which arose for consideration by the courts below was as to
whether the plaintiff had been in possession of the properties in hostile declaration of his title
vis-à-vis his co- owners and they were in know thereof.”
(c) This court in L.N. Aswathama v. P. Prakash20 (two-
Judge Bench) had observed that permissive possession or possession in the absence of Animus
possidendi would not constitute the claim of adverse possession.
(d) It was also held in the case of Chatti Konati Rao v.
Palle Venkata Subba Rao21 (two-Judge Bench) - “15. Animus possidendi as is well known is a
requisite ingredient of adverse possession. Mere possession does not ripen into possessory title until
the possessor holds the property adverse to the title of the true owner for the said purpose. The
person who claims adverse possession is required to establish the date on which he came in
possession, nature of possession, the factum of possession, knowledge to the true owner, duration of
possession and that possession was open and undisturbed…” (Emphasis supplied) 19 (2007) 9 SCC
641 20 (2009) 13 SCC 229 21 (2010) 14 SCC 316 Referring to the above judgement Subha Rao
(supra) this Court has reiterated the cardinality of the presence of Animus possidendi in a case
concerning adverse possession in Brijesh Kumar & Anr. v. Shardabai (dead) by LRs.22 (two- Judge
Bench).
21.5 Such a plea is available not only as a defence when title is questioned, but is also available as a
claim to a person who has perfected his title;
The prior position of law as set out in Gurudwara Sahab v. Gram Panchayat Village Sirthala23
(two-Judge Bench) was that the plea of adverse possession can be used only as a shield by the
defendant and not as a sword by the plaintiff. However, the position was changed later by the
decision of this Hon’ble Court in the case of Ravinder Kaur (supra) had held that - “…Title or
interest is acquired it can be used as a sword by the plaintiff as well as a shield by the defendant
within ken of Article 65 of the Act and any person who has perfected title by way of adverse
possession, can file a suit for restoration of possession in case of dispossession…” 22 (2019) 9 SCC
369 23 (2014) 1 SCC 669 The position in Ravinder Kaur (supra) was followed in Narasamma & Ors.
v. A. Krishnappa (Dead) Through LRs.24 (three-Judge Bench).Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 921.6 Mere passing of an ejectment order does not cause brake in possession neither causes his
dispossession;
In Balkrishna v. Satyaprakash24 (two-Judge Bench) this Court held :
“…Mere passing of an order of ejectment against a person claiming to be in adverse
possession neither causes his dispossession nor discontinuation of his possession
which alone breaks the continuity of possession.” 21.7 When the land subject of
proceedings wherein adverse possession has been claimed, belongs to the
Government, the Court is duty-bound to act with greater seriousness, effectiveness,
care and circumspection as it may lead to Destruction of a right/title of the State to
immovable property.
In State of Rajasthan v. Harphool Singh25 (two-Judge Bench) it was held :
“12. So far as the question of perfection of title by adverse possession and that too in
respect of public property is concerned, the question requires to be considered more
seriously and effectively for the reason 24 (2001) 2 SCC 498 25 (2000) 5 SCC 652
that it ultimately involves destruction of right/title of the State to immovable
property and conferring upon a third-party encroacher title where he had none.”
Further, in Mandal Revenue Officer v. Goundla Venkaiah26 (two-Judge Bench) it
was stated :
“…It is our considered view that where an encroacher, illegal occupant or land
grabber of public property raises a plea that he has perfected title by adverse
possession, the court is duty-bound to act with greater seriousness, care and
circumspection. Any laxity in this regard may result in destruction of right/title of the
State to immovable property and give an upper hand to the encroachers,
unauthorised occupants or land grabbers.” 21.8 A plea of adverse possession must be
pleaded with proper particulars, such as, when the possession became adverse. The
court is not to travel beyond pleading to give any relief, in other words, the plea must
stand on its own two feet.
This Court has held this in the case of V. Rajeshwari v. T.C. Saravanabava27 (two-Judge Bench) :
“…A plea not properly raised in the pleadings or in issues at the stage of the trial,
would not be permitted to be raised for the first time at the stage of appeal…” 26
(2010) 2 SCC 461 27 (2004) 1 SCC 551 It has also been held in the case of State of
Uttrakhand v. Mandir Sri Laxman Sidh Maharaj28 (two-Judge Bench) :
“…The courts below also should have seen that courts can grant only that relief which
is claimed by the plaintiff in the plaint and such relief can be granted only on the
pleadings but not beyond it. In other words, courts cannot travel beyond the
pleadings for granting any relief…” Mandir Sri Laxman Sidh Maharaj (supra) wasGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 10relied on in Dharampal (Dead) v. Punjab Wakf Board29 (two-Judge Bench) on the
same principle.
21.9 Claim of independent title and adverse possession at the same time amount to contradictory
pleas. The case of Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant30 (two-Judge Bench) elaborated this
principle as :
“15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it will not be considered to be
adverse. The reason being that a person whose possession can be referred to a lawful
title will not be permitted to show that his possession was hostile to another's title.
One who holds possession on behalf of another, does not by mere denial of that
other's title make his possession adverse so as to give himself the benefit of the
statute of limitation.
Therefore, a person who enters into possession having a lawful title, cannot divest
another of that title by pretending that he had no title at all.” 28 (2017) 9 SCC 579 29
(2018) 11 SCC 449 30 (1995) 2 SCC 543 This principle was upheld in the case of
Mohan Lal v.
Mirza Abdul Gaffar31 (two-Judge Bench) -
“4. As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the second plea. Having come into possession
under the agreement, he must disclaim his right thereunder and plead and prove assertion of his
independent hostile adverse possession to the knowledge of the transferor or his successor in title or
interest and that the latter had acquiesced to his illegal possession during the entire period of 12
years, i.e., up to completing the period of his title by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario.
Since the appellant's claim is founded on Section 53-A, it goes without saying that he admits by
implication that he came into possession of the land lawfully under the agreement and continued to
remain in possession till date of the suit. Thereby the plea of adverse possession is not available to
the appellant.” The Court in Uttam Chand (supra) has reiterated this principle of adverse
possession.
21.10 Burden of proof rests on the person claiming adverse possession.
This Court, in P.T. Munichikkanna Reddy v. Revamma32 (two-Judge Bench), it held that initially
the burden lied on the landowner to prove his title and title. Thereafter it shifts on the other party to
prove title by adverse possession. It was observed: – 31 (1996) 1 SCC 639 32 (2007) 6 SCC 59 “34.
The law in this behalf has undergone a change. In terms of Articles 142 and 144 of the Limitation
Act, 1908, the burden of proof was on the plaintiff to show within 12 years from the date of
institution of the suit that he had title and possession of the land, whereas in terms of Articles 64
and 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the legal position has underwent complete change insofar as the
onus is concerned : once a party proves its title, the onus of proof would be on the other party to
prove claims of title by adverse possession….” The Court reiterated this principle in the case of
Janata Dal Party v. Indian National Congress33 (two-Judge Bench):Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 11“…the entire burden of proving that the possession is adverse to that of the plaintiffs,
is on the defendant…” 21.11 The State cannot claim the land of its citizens by way of
adverse possession as it is a welfare State.
[State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar34 (two-Judge Bench)]
22. In the instant facts, for the respondents to be granted the enjoyment of the disputed property,
clear, continuous and hostile possession would have to be established by way of cogent evidence and
the animus possidendi must be demonstrated. We now proceed to examine whether these
requirements are met with in the present case. 33 (2014) 16 SCC 731 34 (2011) 10 SCC 404
23. Here, we are concerned with the respondents staking claim on property which undisputedly
belongs to the state. Keeping in view the principles hitherto reproduced, we may once again, with
benefit, refer to Harphool Singh (supra), this Court observed :
“12. So far as the question of perfection of title by adverse possession and that too in
respect of public property is concerned, the question requires to be considered more
seriously and effectively for the reason that it ultimately involves destruction of
right/title of the State to immovable property and conferring upon a third-party
encroacher title where he had none. The decision in P. Lakshmi Reddy v. L. Lakshmi
Reddy [AIR 1957 SC 314 : 1957 SCR 195] adverted to the ordinary classical
requirement — that it should be nec vi, nec clam, nec precario — that is the
possession required must be adequate in continuity, in publicity and in extent to
show that it is possession adverse to the competitor. It was also observed therein that
whatever may be the animus or intention of a person wanting to acquire title by
adverse possession, his adverse possession cannot commence until he obtains actual
possession with the required animus. In the decision reported in Secy. of State for
India in Council v. Debendra Lal Khan [(1933) 61 IA 78 : 1934 All LJ 153 (PC)]
strongly relied on for the respondents, the Court laid down further that it is sufficient
that the possession be overt and without any attempt at concealment so that the
person against whom time is running, ought if he exercises due vigilance, to be aware
of what is happening and if the rights of the Crown have been openly usurped it
cannot be heard to plead that the fact was not brought to its notice. In Annasaheb
Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant [(1995) 2 SCC 543 : AIR 1995 SC 895] it was observed
that a claim of adverse possession being a hostile assertion involving expressly or
impliedly in denial of title of the true owner, the burden is always on the person who
asserts such a claim to prove by clear and unequivocal evidence that his possession
was hostile to the real owner and in deciding such claim, the courts must have regard
to the animus of the person doing those acts.” (Emphasis supplied)
24. The claimants via a claim of adverse possession seek to be declared the owners, by lapse of time
of land belonging to the government. When faced with this situation, it is clear that the Court is
required to consider this question “more seriously”. The first part of burden of proof as discussed in
Revamma (supra) is undoubtedly met with since the subject land being Government land, was neverGovt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 12in dispute. The burden of proof once shifted, it was for the claimants to prove their possession to be
openly hostile to the rights of the government.
25. By way of evidence adduced, nothing, save in except testimonies of villagers, has been brought
on record. A perusal of such evidence also shows no decisive statements being made and instead, on
the basis of the estimated age of trees on such land, is the length of possession of the respondents
being calculated.
26. On separate analysis, the testimonies upon which the claimants seek to place reliance and which
the impugned judgement terms as “unshaken”, while undoubtedly pointing towards the long-term
possession of the claimants on the land in question, are not of such a nature to satisfy the
requirement of a “more serious and effective” enquiry.
27. A perusal of the testimonies reveals that consistency is lacking in terms of the age of the rubber
trees. Certain witnesses claim the age to be 15 years while others claim the same to be 18 years.
28. In first appeal, the Court noted that no independent commission, or verification had been
carried out of the age of the trees on the basis of which possession was being calculated. In view of
this uncontroverted position, whether the standard of proof as held by this Court in Harphool Singh
(supra) in no uncertain terms -
“When the property was a vacant land before the alleged construction was put up, to show open and
hostile possession which could alone in law constitute adverse to the State, in this case, some
concrete details of the nature of occupation with proper proof thereof would be absolutely necessary
and mere vague assertions cannot by themselves be a substitute for such concrete proof required of
open and hostile possession.” (Emphasis supplied) cannot be termed as met. An estimation of age of
the trees cannot be, by any stretch, termed as sufficient proof required to disturb the title that
undisputedly rests with the Government as also testified by PW-1 and PW-2. Proper and concrete
proof as required would need for the claimants to show some proof of possession, other than
statements which may be vague. It is also clear from the above discussion that merely a long period
of possession, does not translate into the right of adverse possession. Surmises, conjectures and
approximations cannot serve the basis for taking away the right over land resting with the State and
place the said bundle of rights in the hands of one who did not have any such rights.
29. It is a matter of record that proceedings of ejectment of the claimant stood initiated before the
concerned Tehsildar in which claimant neither pleaded nor claimed title by way of adverse
possession. To the contrary, the unauthorised occupation was not disputed, with the only plea being
taken of having planted certain trees (rubber trees), put to use for rubber tapping.
30. It is also a matter on record that such proceedings stood concluded by the appropriate authority
(Tehsildar). By order dated 24th February, 1982 the appropriate authority (Tehsildar) had passed an
order directing the claimant to not only vacate the land but also to pay compensation amounting to
Rs. 354/-; these facts were never referred to in the plaint.Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 1331. The Assistant Collector, Idduki, unequivocally stated the reason for non-assignment of land to
the claimanst, for the same being set out for a public purpose. Noticeably, the order passed by the
Tehsildar or the Assistant Collector was never ever subjected to challenge by the claimants either by
resorting to the mechanism provided under the Act nor in the suit, the subject matter of
consideration.
32. It is for the first time in the written statement that the factum of passing the order under The Act
was brought to the notice of the Civil Court which fact was neither refuted to nor explained by way of
replication.
33. That apart, joint reading of the testimonies of PW1 (Brajeetha), PW3 (Cherian) and PW4
(Narayanan), do not in any manner establish the factum of the claimant having ever claimed the
possession hostile to that of true owner i.e., the State.
34. Their testimonies only establish plaintiffs/claimants’ possession and having put the land to use
for planting trees, though with a variation of period, i.e., about 15 to 40 years. Be that as it may, it
has come on record with some variations that the rubber trees were planted just about 15 to 18 years
prior to the date on which the depositions were recorded.
35. On oath, in a specific query put to PW 1 as to whether there is no record to establish suit the
property to be in their possession from the year 1940 onwards, there is a categorical denial. Equally
the witness denies having any proof of residing in the property, since 1940, adjacent to the property
subject matter of the suit.
36. All that it is stated is that the property was being enjoyed, assuming the same to be theirs.
37. It is in this view of the matter, we find that the findings returned by the High Court holding the
witnesses, more particularly PW1 to PW5 to have established the claimants’ claims by way of
adverse possession to be erroneous.
38. In view of the above, the appeal is allowed. The judgement of the High Court in S.A. 740 of 1995
dated 5th August,2009 is set aside, and the judgement rendered by the First Appellate Court in
Appeal Suit No. 3 of 1991 dated 3rd April, 1995 is restored.
39. Interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
40. No order as to costs.
…………………….J. (ABHAY S. OKA) ……………..……..J. (SANJAY KAROL) Date : 9th August, 2023;
Place : New Delhi.Govt. Of Kerala vs Joseph on 9 August, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59843273/ 14