Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April,
2023
Author: K. M. Joseph
Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, K.M. Joseph
                                                                    ‘REPORTABLE’
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
                      HARYANA POWER PURCHASE CENTRE                Appellant(s)
                                                VERSUS
                      SASAN POWER LTD & ORS.                       Respondent(s)
                      WITH
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11927 OF 2018
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12190 OF 2018
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1670 OF 2019
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12232 OF 2018
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1742 OF 2019
                                           J U D G M E N T
K. M. JOSEPH, J.
(1) The six appeals with which we are concerned have been filed under Section 125 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Act’ for CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. brevity). The
appeals are directed against the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (hereinafter
referred to as ‘Tribunal’ for brevity) in an appeal carried by the first respondent under Section 111 of
the Act. (2) The appeal before the Tribunal, in turn, was lodged against the order passed by theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 1Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (hereinafter referred to as ‘Commission’ for brevity). The
Commission passed the order purporting to be one under Section 79(b) inter alia of the Act in a
petition filed by the first respondent. F A C T S (3) It was decided to set up an Ultra Mega Power
Project. Towards this end, the Power Finance Corporation Limited of India was to be the nodal
agency. It incorporated a Special Purpose Vehicle, which is the first respondent. The idea was to set
up the Ultra Mega Power Project which would be operated by the successful bidder selected through
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. an international competitive bidding. The power generated
by the successful bidder was to be supplied through procurers (the appellants before us), who can be
described also as the distribution licensees under the Act. The appellants were to supply the power
so procured finally to the consumers.
(4) Since what was contemplated was seeking shelter under Section 63 of the Act, we must refer to
the guidelines which have been issued by the Central Government purporting to act under Section
63. Guidelines were issued on 19.01.2005. We deem it appropriate to set out the following
guidelines:
“2.1 These guidelines are being issued under the provisions of Section 63 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 for procurement of electricity by distribution licensees
(Procurer) for:
(a) long-term procurement of electricity for a period of 7 years and above;
(b) Medium term procurement for a period of upto 7 years but exceeding 1 year.
2.2 The guidelines shall apply for procurement of base-load and seasonal power requirements
through competitive bidding, through the following mechanisms:
i. Where the location, technology, or fuel is not specified by the procurer (Case 1);
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. ii. For hydro-power projects, load center
projects or other location specific projects with specific fuel allocation such as captive
mines available, which the procurer intends to set up under tariff based bidding
process (Case 2).” (5) The guidelines are binding on the procurers.
Guideline 3.2 which is related to preparation for the invitation of bids would assume relevance. It
reads as follows:
“3.2 For long-term procurement from hydro electric projects or for projects for which
pre-identified sites are to be utilized (Case
2), the following activities should be completed by the procurer or authorized
representative of the procurer, before commencing the bid process:
- Site identification and land acquisition required for the projectHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 2- Environmental clearance
- Fuel linkage, if required (may also be asked from bidder)
- Water linkage
- Requisite Hydrological, geological, meteorological and seismological data necessary
for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR), where applicable.
The bidder shall be free to verify geological data through his own sources, as the
geological risk would lie with the project developer.
The project site shall be transferred to the successful bidder at a declared price.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Provided that for the projects from which
more than one distribution licensees located in different States intend to procure
power and if the preparations for such projects are being facilitated by the Central
Government, the activities referred to above shall be initiated before the bidding
process and should be completed before signing the power purchase agreement with
the selected bidder.
(6) Under the guidelines, tariff structure is contemplated which consists of capacity
charges and energy charges which are dealt with in detail. It also deals with bidding
process. The bidding process itself is divided into two stages, viz., a determination of
the qualification by a pre-
qualification system and thereafter submission and consideration of essentially what consists of the
financial bid. There is a guideline which deals with arbitration and it was contained in guideline
5.17:
“5.17 The procurer will establish an Amicable Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanism
in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996. The ADR shall be mandatory and time-bound to minimize disputes regarding
the bid process and the documentation thereof.
If the ADR fails to resolve the dispute, the same will be subject to jurisdiction of the
appropriate Regulatory Commission under the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. provisions of the Electricity Act 2003.” (7) It is, accordingly, purporting to act in
terms of the guidelineS that a Request for Qualification (for short RFQ) came to be
issued on 31.03.2006.
Reliance Power Limited was one of the bidders which was pre-qualified in terms of the RFQ. On
18.08.2006, there was a change notified in the guidelines. It brought about the following changes in
the guidelines 5.17 besides guideline No. 4.7. The unamended and the amended guidelines 4.7 andHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 35.17 read as follows:
S. CBG as on 19.01.2005 CBG as amended on 18.08.2006 No.
1. 4.7 Any change in tax on 4.7 Any change in law impacting generation or sale of
electricity cost or revenue from the business as a result of any change in Law of
selling electricity to the with respect to that applicable procurer with respect to the
law on the date of bid submission applicable on the date which is 7 shall be adjusted
separately. days before the last date of RFP bid [Pg. 345,CC-I] submission shall be
adjusted separately. In case of any dispute regarding the impact of any change in law,
the decision of the Appropriate Commission shall apply.
2. Arbitration Arbitration 5.17 The procurer will establish 5.17 Where any dispute
arises an Amicable Dispute Resolution claiming any change in or (ADR) mechanism
in regarding determination of the accordance with the provisions tariff or any tariff
related matters, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. of the Indian Arbitration and
or which partly or wholly could Conciliation Act, 1996. The result in change in tariff,
such ADR shall be mandatory and dispute shall be adjudicated by the time-bound to
minimize Appropriate Commission.
disputes regarding the bid All other disputes shall be resolved process and the documentation by
arbitration under the Indian thereof. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
(8) On 21.08.2006, a Request for Proposal, for short RFP, came to be issued. We deem it
appropriate to refer to the following provisions of the RFP.
“4. While this RFP has been prepared in good faith, neither the Procurers, Authorised
Representative and Power Finance Corporation Limited (PFC) nor their directors or employees or
advisors/consultants make any representation or warranty, express or implied, or accept any
responsibility or liability, whatsoever, in respect of any statements or omissions herein, or the
accuracy, completeness or reliability of information contained herein, and shall incur no liability
under any law, statute, rules or regualations as to the accuracy, reliability or completeness of this
RFP, even if any loss or damage is caused to the Bidder by any act or omission on their part.
1.3 The objective of the bidding process is to select a SuccessfulBidder for development of the
Project as per the terms of the RFP. The Project will have a Contracted Capactiy of minimum of
3500 MW and maximum of 3800 MW in accordance witht he terms of the PPA. The Selected Bidder
shall purchase the entire shareholding of the Authorised Representative CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826
OF 2018 etc. from PFC and its nominees in accordance with Share Purchase Agreement and cause
the Seller to enter into the RFP Project Documents. The Selected Bidder shall be responsible for
ensuring that the Seller undertakes development, finance, ownership, design, engineering
procurement, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of the Project as per the
terms of the RFP Project Documents. The Selected Bidder shall also ensure:Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 4(i) All equipment and auxiliaries shall be suitable for continuous operation in the
frequency range of 47.5 to 51.5 Hz (-5% to +3% of rated frequency of 50.0 Hz).
(ii)The plant shall be capable of delivering contracted capacity continously at 47.5 Hz
grid frequency.
1.4 The Procurers through the Authorised Representative, have initiated development of the Project
at Sasan, District Sidhi, Madhya Pradesh and shall complete the following tasks in this regard by
such time as specified hereunder:
iv. Allocation of main Captive Coal Mine(s) and providing geological report (GR) for
the same; at least ninety (90) days prior to Bid Deadline. Allocation of other Captive
Coal Mine(s) and available information regarding quality and quantity of coal (GR
related information) would be made available at least thirty (30) days prior to Bid
Deadline. The Seller shall pay the final cost of geological reports (Grs). The Indicative
Cost of geological reports (Grs), would be made available at least thirty (30) days
prior to bid Deadline;
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. v. Tying up water linkage for the Project
requirement along with approval of Central Water Commission, at least thirty (30)
days prior to Bid Deadline;
Water intake study report and Project Report including geo-technical study,
topographical survey, area drainage study, socio-economic study and EIA study
(rapid) would be made available at least ninety (90) days prior to Bid Deadline;
vi. issue of certificate by Ministry of Power, Government of India extending the
benefits to power generation projects under Mega Power Policy upto the Scheduled
COD of the Power Station by Government of India at least thrity (30) days prior to
Bid Deadline;
It may be noted that noe of the Procurers, Authorised Representative and PfC, nor
their directors, employees or advisors/consultants make any representation or
warranty, express or implied, or accept any responsibility or liability, whatsoever, in
respect of any statements or omissions made in the water intake study report and
Project Report, or the accuracy, completeness or reliablility of information contained
therein, and shal incur no liability under any law, statute, rules or regualtions as to
the accuracy, reliability or completeness of such water intake study report and Project
Report, even if any loss or damage is caused to the Selected Bidder by any act or
omission on their part. The Ministry of Power and the State Government of Madhya
Pradesh have expressed their support to the Seller, on best endeavour basis, in
enabling the Seller to develop the Project.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 52.7.2.1 The Bidder shall make independent enquiry and satisfy itself with respect to all the required
information, inputs, conditions and cirumstances and factors that may have any effect on his Bid. In
assessing the Bid, it is deemed that the Bidder has inspected and examined the site conditions and
its surroundings, examined the laws and regulations in force in India, the transportation facilities
available in India, the grid conditions, the conditions of roads, bridges, ports, etc. For unloading
and/or transporting heavy pieces of material and has based its design, equipment size and fixed its
price taking into account all such relevant conditions and also the risks, contingencies and other
circumstances which mayh influence or affect the supply of power. 2.7.2.2 In their own interest, the
Bidders are requested to familiarize themselves with the Electricity Act, 2003, the Income Tax Act
1961, the Companies Act, 1956, the Customs Act, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, IEGC, the
regulations framed by regulatory commissions and all other related acts, laws, rules and regulations
prevalent in India. The procuers shall not entertain any request for clarifications from the Bidders
regarding the same. Non-awareness of these laws or such information shall not be a reason for the
Bidder to request for extension of the Bid Deadline. The Bidder undertakes and agrees that before
submission of its Bid all such factors, as generally brought out above, have been fully investigated
and considered while submitting the Bid.
ANNEXURE 5 SITE DETAILS ALONG WITH SITE MAP The Site is located near Sasan village in
Singrauli Tehsil in District Sidhi of Madhya CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Pradesh. The
nearest Railway Station is Shakti Nagar (18km) and nearest Airport is Varanasi (250 km). The site is
situated at 23°58’30”N latitude and 82°37’03”E longtitue. About 3500 acres of land has been
identified for the project covering villages of Sidhikala, Harhawa, Tiara, Jhanjitola and Sidhikhud.
Out of this, about 2000 acres of land has been identified for main plant, about 1100 acres for ash
disposal/dyke and 400 acres for colony.
Water source for the project is Govind Ballabh Pant Sagar (Rihand Reservoir), which is about 6-7
km from the main plant site. Water will be brought to site by suitable pumping arrangement and
pipelines. Coal blocks (mines) in Singrauli area with reserves of about 700-800 million tons will be
allocated as Captive Coal Blocks (mines) for this Project. The Project will require the development of
a coalmine with production of 18-20 million tons per annum (MTPA) Vicinity map of Site is
enclosed.
Further details are provided in the Project Report."
(9) We may, at this juncture, notice also that the Special Purpose Vehicle which was put in place for
carrying out the activities also, commissioned a study by WAPCOS (a public sector body of the
Central Government). It was tasked with the project to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
ascertain about the availability of water inter alia. Water is an indispensable factor for the successful
running of the power plant which was contemplated. WAPCOS made available its report on
03.08.2006.
(10) Reliance Power Limited applied pursuant to the RFP. Though, initially, its bid was not the
lowest, but on account of the fact that the lowest bidder was found to be not eligible, Reliance Power
Limited emerged as the lowest bidder. In keeping with the conditions, Reliance Power LimitedHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 6acquired 100 per cent share holding of the first respondent and it was favoured with the Letter of
Intent on 01.08.2007. It entered into a Power Purchase Agreement (hereinafter referred to as ‘PPA’)
on 07.08.2007. In the second week of December, 2007, it would appear that the first respondent
which now stood transformed as a fully owned company of the successful bidder Reliance Power
Limited, commissioned a new Study by WAPCOS. WAPCOS submitted its report on 04.04.2008.
We must at this juncture notice that ‘21.07.2007’ has been CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
determined as the cut off date, the relevance of which will be unfolded in the later part of the
judgment.
(11) The PPA contemplated two phases. The first phase was the construction of the power plant. The
second was the operation of the power plant. The PPA was to be enforced for a period of 25 years.
Therefore, we can safely characterise it as a long term agreement to purchase power. Since this was
a case of competitive bidding, leading to the finding out of the lowest bidder, but faced with the
regime under Section 63 of the Act which stood attracted, after the PPA was entered into, a petition
was moved before the Commission for adopting the rates as contemplated in the PPA. By order
dated 17.10.2007, the Commission after considering the relevant matters, adopted the rates in
accordance with the PPA. It is, thereafter, that the present petition was moved by the first
respondent on 19.02.2013. It is relevant at this stage to set out certain portions of the petition. The
petition has been filed under Section 79 of the Act read with the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. statutory framework governing procurement of power through competitive bidding and articles
13 and 17 of the PPA between the parties for compensation due to change in law ‘during the
construction period’. After setting out the facts which we do not consider relevant to advert to, the
following is noticed.
“5. It is submitted that the following Changes in Law have occurred during the Construction Period
of the Project which have caused the Capital Cost of the Project to increase substantially:
a) Increase in Declared price of Land for the Project which includes the land for the
Power Station, the Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal captive coal
blocks;
b) Increase in cost of implementation of the Resettlement and Rehabilitation Plan
(“R&R Plan”) for the Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal captive coal
blocks;
c) Increase in cost of Geological Reports for the Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension
and Chhatrasal captive coal blocks;
d) Increase in cost of compensatory afforestation for the Moher, Moher-Amlohri
Extension and Chhatrasal captive coal blocks;
e) Increase in cost of Water Intake system due to an incorrect assessment of
conditions in the original report supplied to the bidders at the RFP stage;Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 7f) Levy of excise duty on cement and steel used in the Project; and
g) Levy of Customs Duty on mining equipment CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. imported for the Project.” (12) Since, in this case, we are concerned only with two
aspects, namely claims under clause(e) and clause(g) we deem it appropriate only to
refer to the pleadings of the first respondent in regard to the same.
Increase in cost of Water Intake System “65. As per Clause 1.4(v) of RFP for Sasan UMPP, the
Procurers through the Authorized Representative had to provide water intake study report.
WAPCOS (a premier Government of India agency) was appointed to conduct the water intake study.
WAPCOS, as the expert agency identified the water intake pump house location and the pipeline
route from the intake pump house to the power plant in its Report. This report was made available
to all the bidders before bid submission so that the bidders could factor in the cost of the water
intake system in preparation of their financial bid i.e., the tariff at which power would be supplied to
the Procurers. The total estimated cost for the construction of water intake system for the location
and route indicated in the report by WAPCOS was estimated to be approximately Rs.92 Crores. The
WAPCOS Report along with the estimated cost are annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P- 24
(Colly).” “66. After RPower acquired the Petitioner, WAPCOS was appointed to confirm the CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. technical feasibility as part of detailed engineering exercise.
During this process, it was discovered that the water intake location as finalized by WAPCOS before
the bidding was not an appropriate location and does not ensure reliable supply of water to the
power plant. It was also found that the water intake at the original location indicated by WAPCOS in
the pre-bid report would have resulted in shutdown of power plant for a considerable period during
the lean season.” “67. Thereafter, WAPCOS conducted detailed bathymetric studies and
recommended a new location for water intake, which was 23 km from the power plant as against
12.5 km initially indicated at the time of bidding (original location). It was highlighted that new
location would ensure reliable water supply to the power plant. Due to increase in distance,
submergence area along the route and construction time, there has been considerable increase in
the cost of the water intake system as detailed below. The report of WAPCOS recommending the
revised location is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure p-25.” “68. The cost for the
construction of water system for the new location is Rs. 244 Cr. Out of the aforesaid amount, a sum
of Rs.185 Crores has already been incurred and balance of Rs. 59Crores is to be spent. The estimated
increase in cost of the water intake system due to the change in location of the water intake system is
Rs.152 Crores. Since this increase is directly attributable to the error in the WAPCOS report
provided to the bidders at the pre- bid stage, the Petitioner is required to be compensated for the
same. The cost break up CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. for the new/appropriate location
which will ensure reliable water supply is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P-26.” “75. It
is submitted that the UMPP Policy envisages domestic coal based UMPPs as integrated projects
where the power station and the captive coal mines are treated as an integrated unit. This is also
recognized in the PPA as well as other project documents like the RFQ and the RFP.” “76. As per
Notification 21 of 2002-Customs dated 01.03.2002 issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government
of India, the customs duty on goods required for setting up mega power projects has been
prescribed as nil meaning thereby that no customs duty will be levied on goods imported for setting
up a mega power project. A copy of Notification 21 of 2002-Customs is annexed herewith andHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 8marked as Annexure P-32.” “77. Sasan UMPP was accorded in-principle mega power project status
as per Ministry of Power's letter no. F.No. 12/18/2006-P&P dated 20.10.2006. The final certificate
was issued on 21.09.2007.” “78. Sasan UMPP is an integrated power project with captive coal mines
viz. Moher, Moher Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal Coal Blocks. The captive coal mines allocated
for Sasan UMPP form an integral and essential part of the Project and any equipment imported in
relation to the captive coal mines would therefore be treated as goods imported for setting up the
Project.” CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. “79. The Petitioner was required to import mining
equipment for setting up the captive coal mines from which coal will be sourced for the Project since
the required mining equipments were not available in India.” “80. On 05.05.2011, the Petitioner
applied to the Energy Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh for recommendation letter to
import mining equipments for Sasan UMPP under nil custom duty as is applicable for the other
equipment such as power plants of the Project. This application was premised on Notification 21 of
2002-Customs. However, vide an Office Memorandum dated 17.06.2011, the Ministry of Power has
intimated that the exemption for customs duty for UMPPs is given only with respect to power
equipment, which was forwarded to Petitioner by Government of Madhya Pradesh on 20.06.2011.
Copies of letters dated 05.05.2011 and 17.06.2011 are annexed herewith and marked as Annexure
P-33(Colly)” “81. Based on Ministry of Power's Office Memorandum's, the Energy Department,
Government of Madhya Pradesh declined to issue the recommendation letter which was required by
the Petitioner to claim nil customs duty. In view of the refusal by Energy Department, Government
of Madhya Pradesh and in the interest of the Project and power consumers, Petitioner had to seek
recommendation letter from Energy Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh to import mining
equipments at project import rate of 20.94%, which is now reduced to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. 16.85% with effect from 17.03.2012.” “82. The decision of the Ministry of Power detailed in
its office memorandum dated 17.06.2011 and refusal by Energy Department, Goverment of Madhya
Pradesh to provide recommendation letter to import mining equipments for Sasan UMPP under nil
custom duty amounts to a Change in Law under Article 13.1 of the PPA and Petitioner is entitled to
be compensated for the same.” “83. The total amount of customs duty paid by the Petitioner on
mining equipments imported for Sasan UMPP is Rs. 361.47 Crores till date. The total custom duty
for mining equipments is estimated to be about Rs. 531 Crores. The details of the custom duty paid
on mining equipments and estimated to be paid in future are annexed herewith in Annexure P-34
(Colly).” “84. It is submitted that the Petitioner has already surpassed the indicative costs provided
by the Procurers and in certain instances as indicated hereinabove, the Petitioner will be required to
pay the increased Capital Cost in the future. In this regard, the Petitioner is claiming the following
reliefs:
(a) In relation to the Changes in Law where the additional Capital Cost has already
been incurred, this Hon'ble Commission may direct the Procurers to compensate the
Petitioner for such increase in Capital Cost; and
(b) In relation to the Changes in Law for CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
which the liability is yet to be incurred, the Petitioner is seeking a declaration from
this Hon'ble Commission that the increased expenditure amounts to Change in Law.
The actual payment will be claimed as and when it falls due.” “89. From the above
discussions and facts, it is clear that:-Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 9(a) One of the objectives of the National Electricity Policy and the Tariff Policy is to
secure commercial viability of electricity sector while ensuring fair pricing and
quality of supply.
(b) Power procurement under Section 63 of the Act is governed by the statutory
framework comprising (i) Section 63 of the Act, (ii) Government of India's Guidelines
and (iii) standard documents being RFP and PPA.
(c) In terms of Section 63 of the Act the successful bid must be selected consistent
with the guiding principles under Section 61 of the Act meaning thereby that while
adoption of tariff under Section 63 of the Act, the principles as laid down under
Section 61 need to be complied.
(d) Power procurement pursuant to the statutory framework constitutes a statutory
contract in terms of the pre-approved and finalized PPA governed by provisions of
the Act as well as the Guidelines.
(e) The PPA envisages the adjustment of CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
tariff by this Hon'ble Commission to restore/restitute the party adversely affected
(the Petitioner in the present case).” “90. It is also pertinent to note that under
Section 79(1)(b) of the Act, this Hon'ble Commission has been given the power to
regulate the tariff of generating companies like the Petitioner which have a composite
scheme for generation and sale of electricity in more than one state.” “91. The present
Petition has been filed for compensation on account of Changes in Law which have
impacted the Capital Cost of the Project as well as for compensation for costs
incurred in excess of the indicative costs provided by the Procurers, which were the
basis for formulation of the financial bid of Rpower.” “92. The Petitioner had
approached the Procurers for an amicable resolution.
However, all efforts made by the Petitioner to seek an amicable resolution to the unforeseen and
undeserved commercial implication with the Procurers have proved fruitless. In this backdrop, it
has become imperative and necessary for the Petitioner to invoke jurisdiction of this Hon’ble
Commission to issue appropriate orders as prayed for in the Petition.” “93. It is submitted that the
present Petition has been filed invoking:-
(a) Section 79(1)b) of the Act under which CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
this Hon'ble Commission has the power to regulate the tariff of the Petitioner.
(b) Section 79(1)(f) of the Act which gives this Hon'ble Commission the power to
adjudicate upon disputes involving the Petitioner.
(c) Regulations 82, 92 and 113 of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
(Conduct of Business) Regulations, 1999.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 10(d) Article 13 of the PPA read with Article 17 and Paragraph 5.17 of the Competitive
Bidding Guidelines in terms of which this Hon’ble Commission has the power to
adjudicate upon any dispute that arises claiming any change in or regarding
determination of the tariff or any tariff related matters, or which partly or wholly
could result in change in tariff.” “104. As detailed in Paragraphs 75-83 above,
Notification 21 of 2002-Customs issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government of
India granted 100% exemption from Customs duty to goods required for setting up
mega power projects. The Petitioner was required to import equipment for operation
of the coal mine which is an integral part of the Project.” “105. It is submitted that as
per the said Notification, any entity which intended to claim the customs duty
exemption was required to apply to the Sponsoring Authority for an exemption
certificate. This was essential to claim the customs duty CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826
OF 2018 etc. exemption. In this regard, the Petitioner wrote to the Government of
Madhya Pradesh to recommend the Petitioner’s case to the Commissioner of
Customs on 5.5.2011 for nil custom duty on mining equipments.” “106. It is
submitted that vide an Office Memorandum dated 17.06.2011, the Ministry of Power
intimated Government of Madhya Pradesh that the exemption for customs duty for
UMPPs is given only with respect to power equipment. The total amount of customs
duty paid by the Petitioner on mining equipments imported for Sasan UMPP is
Rs.361.47 Crores till date. Total custom duty for mining equipments is estimated to
be about Rs. 531 Crores.” “107. It is submitted that the decision of the Ministry of
Power amounts to a Change in Law under Article 13.1 of the PPA and the Petitioner is
entitled to be compensated for the same. It is further submitted that the Petitioner
not being allowed to import mining equipment under nil customs duty as is granted
for the other equipment such as power plants of the Project qualifies as Change in
Law under Article 13.1 of the PPA.” “108. It is submitted that as per RFP for Sasan
UMPP, the Procurers had to provide water intake study report. This study was
conducted by WAPCOS and the report was made available to all the bidders before
bid submission. The cost of the water intake system as per the report was
approximately Rs.92 Crores. This estimation was factored CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826
OF 2018 etc. into the bid at the time of submission of the financial bid.” “109. It is
submitted that after Rpower acquired the Petitioner, WAPCOS was tasked with
confirming the technical feasibility during the detailed engineering exercise.
During this process, it was discovered that the water intake location as intimated in the pre-bid
report was not appropriate. After, conducting another detailed study, WAPCOS determined that a
new location would be suitable. The new location is 23 km from the power plant as against 12.5 km
initially indicated at the time of bidding (original location).” “110. It is submitted that due to the
increase in distance, submergence area along the route and construction time there has been
considerable increase in cost of the water intake system. The cost for the construction of water
system for the new location is Rs. 244 Cr. The estimated increase in cost of the water intake system
due to the change in location of the water intake system is Rs.152 Crores.” “111. It is submitted that
the increase in cost of the water intake system is on account of the errors in the report provided by
the Procurers and therefore, the Procurers are obligated for compensating the Petitioner for theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 11difference in cost. It is further submitted that since the water pipeline corridor is part of the Power
Station Land and the water intake pipeline CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. is an integral
part of the Power Station, any change in the indicative cost of the water intake system will be
covered under Change in Law.” “120. Section 79 of the Act, inter alia, empowers the Hon’ble
Commission to:-
(a) Regulate the tariff of generating companies other than those owned or controlled
by the Central Government if such generating companies entered into or otherwise
have a composite scheme for generation and sale of electricity in more than one
State; and
(b) To adjudicate upon the disputes involving the distribution companies or
transmission licensees with regard to the matters connected with regulation of tariff
of generating companies.” “128. It is submitted that the present case involves a
situation where the compensatory mechanism under the PPA for compensation for
Change in Law has failed. It does not meet the objective of restoring an affected party
to the same economic condition as if the change in law had not occurred. Therefore,
this is a fit case for this Hon’ble Commission to exercise its powers under Section 79
and devise a mechanism to uphold the objective and purpose of Article 13 – to
provide economic restitution.” “129. It is further submitted that PPA envisages a
scenario where this Hon’ble CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Commission can
interfere with the issues relating to the claim made by a party for any change and/or
determination of the tariff or any matter relating to the tariff or claims made by any
party which partly or wholly related to any change in the tariff or determination of
any such claim which can result in change in the tariff. In this context, Articles 13 and
17 are noteworthy.
While Article 13 of the PPA envisages tariff adjustment in the event of “Change in Law”, Article 17 of
the PPA provides for dispute resolution, by the Hon’ble Commission in case of claim made by any
party for any change in or determination of tariff or any matter related to tariff or claims made by
any party, which partly or wholly relate to any change in the tariff or determination of any of such
claims could result in change in tariff.” “142. The Petitioner therefore most humbly and respectfully
prays that this Hon’ble Commission be pleased to adjudicate upon the present Petition to:-
(a) Declare that the items set out in Paragraph 5 above as Change in Law during
Construction Period and/or changes which has led to an increase in the Capital Cost
of the Project;
(b) Restitute the Petitioner to the same economic condition as if the said Changes in
Law had not occurred and devise a mechanism by which the Petitioner is
compensated for the aggregate financial impact and increase CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. in capital cost of account of the Changes in Law, the details of
which are set out in Paragraph 113 above; andHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 12(c) Pass any such other and further reliefs as this Hon’ble Commission deems just
and proper in the nature and circumstances of the present case.” (13) After exchange
of pleadings, the Commission passed the order dated 04.02.2015. Since we are in
these appeals to be detained only by two aspects, we notice the following findings:
“30. The petitioner has submitted that as per Clause 1.4(V) of RFP for Sasan UMPP,
the Procurers through the Authorized Representative had to provide water intake
study report. WAPCOS (a premier Government of India agency) was appointed to
conduct the water intake study. WAPCOS, as the expert agency identified the water
intake pump house location and the pipeline route from the intake pump house to the
power plant in its Report. This report was made available to all the bidders before bid
submission so that the bidders could factor in the cost of the water intake system in
preparation of their financial bid i.e. the tariff at which power would be supplied to
the Procurers. The total estimated cost for the construction of water intake system for
the location and route indicated in the report by WAPCOS was estimated to be
approximately 92 Crore.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. After RPower acquired the project, WAPCOS
was appointed to confirm the technical feasibility as part of detailed engineering
exercise. During this process, it was discovered that the water intake location as
finalized by WAPCOS before the bidding was not an appropriate location and does
not ensure reliable supply of water to the power plant. It was also found that the
water intake at the original location indicated by WAPCOS in the pre-bid report
would have resulted in shutdown of power plant for a considerable period during the
lean season. Thereafter, WAPCOS conducted detailed bathymetric studies and
recommended a new location for water intake, which was 23 km from the power
plant as against 12.5 km initially indicated at the time of bidding (original location).
It was highlighted that new location would ensure reliable water supply to the power
plant. Due to increase in distance, submergence area along the route and
construction time, there has been considerable increase in cost of the water intake
system as per following details (Annexure P-26 of the petition) and as per the earlier
report of WAPCOS:-
     S.     Cost Item                  As         per Current
     No.                               earlier        estimate
                                       WAPCOS Report
                                       ( Crore)           (
                                                           Crore)
     1      Cost of Pump House                     21.00      62.97
     2      Cost of Bridge                         10.50
     3      Supply       of     Pipe               30.50      73.91
            lineHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 13CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 4 Laying of pipe 16.70 57.97 line 5
Mechanical 10.20 20.32 6 Electrical 3.50 4.02 7 Dredging for Pump 25.13 House 8
Total 92.40 244.32
31. MPPMCL has submitted that it is an expense incurred by the petitioner but is not
covered under “Change in Law” under Article 13.1.1 of the PPA. However, it is
concluded that the cost has been incurred by the petitioner and exceeds the estimates
given by the procurer's authorized representative prior to bid submission. HPCC has
submitted that the price and other details given in the bidding document were by way
of information and it was for the bidders to conduct independent enquiry and verify
the information and details. There is no misrepresentation by the procurers or by the
Bid Process Coordinators at the time of bidding in relation to water intake for the
project. In view of the specific disclaimer and the requirement to conduct
independent enquiry, the petitioner was required to make appropriate enquiries into
the matter before bidding and the bidders were not entitled to proceed only on the
basis indicative information given by the Bid Process Coordinator.
32. We have considered the submission of the petitioner and respondent. As against
the indicative cost of 92.40 crore, the cost for the construction of water system for
the new CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. location is 244 crore out of the
aforesaid amount, a sum of 185 crore has already been incurred and balance of 59
crore is to be spent. The estimated increase in cost of the water intake system due to
the change in location of the water intake system is 152 crore. The petitioner has
submitted that since this increase is directly attributable to the error in the WAPCOS
report provided to the bidders at the pre-bid stage, the petitioner is required to be
compensated for the same.
33. In our view, the claim is not covered under any of the provisions of Article 13.1.1
of the PPA. The petitioner being aware that the cost of water intake system being
indicative in nature and being not covered under the “Change in Law” under Article
13 should have informed itself fully with the actual site conditions before preparing
the bid and accordingly factored the possible estimates of water intake system while
quoting the bid instead of relying on the indicative cost. In this connection, para
2.7.2.1 of the RfP document provides as under:
          “2.7.2.1   The   Bidder   shall    make
          independent    enquiry   and    satisfy
          itself with respect to all the
          required     information,       inputs,
          conditions   and   circumstances    and
factors that may have any effect on his Bid. In assessing the Bid, it is deemed that the
Bidder has inspected and examined the site conditions of roads, bridges, ports etc. for
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. unloading and/or transporting heavy pieces
of material and has based its design, equipment size and fixed its price taking intoHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 14account all such relevant conditions and also the risks, contingencies and other
circumstances which may influence or affect supply of power.” Further para 4 of the
RfP document provides that the pricing and other details given in the bidding
documents are by way of information only and it was for the bidders to conduct
independent enquiry and verify the details and information. Para 4 are extracted as
under:
“4. While the RFP has been prepared in good faith, neither the Procurers, Authorised
Representative and Power Finance Corporation (PFC) nor their directors or
employees or advisors/consultants make any representation or warranty, express or
implied, or accept any responsibility or liability, whatsoever, in respect of any
statements or omission herein, or the accuracy, completeness or reliability of
information contained herein, and shall incur no liability under any law, statute,
rules or regulations as to the accuracy, reliability or completeness of this RFP, even if
any loss or damage is caused to the Bidder by any act or omission on their part.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the
petitioner to verify the suitability of the location of water intake and ensure reliable
water supply for the power plant and workout the relevant approximate cost of water
intake system independently and factor in the estimates in the bid so that a realistic
cost is reflected in the bid. The petitioner having failed to do so, the increase in cost
on account of this head is not admissible.” (14) As far as the question relating to
imposition of customs duty on mining equipment is concerned, the same is dealt with
in paragraphs 40 and 41.
“40. We have considered the submission of the petitioner and respondents. The Notification
No.49/2006 provides as under:
Notification No. 49/2006-Customs In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-
section (1) of Section 25 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the Central
Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do,
hereby makes the following further amendments in the notification of the
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) No.
21/2002- Customs, dated the 1st March, 2002, which was published in the Gazette of
India, Extraordinary vide number G.S.R. 118(E), dated the 1st March, 2002, namely:-
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. In the said notification,-
(I) in the Table, against S.No.400, for the entry in column (3), the following entry
shall be substituted, namely:-
“Goods required for setting up of any Mega Power Project, so certified by an officer
not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of
Power, that is to say-Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 15(a) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 700MW or more, located in the
States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura; or
(b) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000MW or more, located in
States other than those specified in clause (a) above;
or
(c) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 350MW or more, located in the States of Jammu
and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and
Tripura; or
(d) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 500MW or more, located in States other than
those specified in clause (c) above”;
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (II) in the Annexure, in Condition No. 86, for sub-clauses
(ii) and
(iii) of clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
“(ii) the power purchasing State undertakes, in principle, to privatize distribution in
all cities, in that State, each of which has a population of more than one million,
within a period to be fixed by the Ministry of Power.”.
[F.No.354/104/2003-TRU] It is noticed that the revised policy guidelines issued by
Government of India, Ministry of Power vide its letter No. A- 118/2003-IPC dated
2.8.2006 has stated that an inter-State thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000
MW or more is eligible for grant of mega power status. It further states as under:
“Zero Customs Duty: In terms of the notification of the Government of India in the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) No. 21/2002- Customs dated 1.3.2002
read together with No. 49/2006-Customs dated 26.5.2006, the import of capital
equipment would be free of customs duty for these projects.”
41. It is to be considered whether under the notification as stated above, mining
equipments were exempted from customs duty.
General Exemption No.122 under the Customs CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Notification
No.21/2002 as amended from time to time contains the list of items which are exempted from
customs duty. It is observed that Notification 21 of 2002-Customs clearly demarcates the power
projects and mining projects separately. It is seen that at Ser No.399 of the list, coal mining projects
are liable to pay customs duty. Ser No. 400 only exempts the mega power project from payment of
customs duty and there is no mention that it includes captive power plants. Therefore, it cannot beHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 16said that as on the cut-off date, there was exemption on mining equipment and the petitioner had
taken into consideration such exemption while quoting the bids. Nothing has been produced in the
petition which could indicate that any such impression was given by the procurers or their
representative prior to bidding. In view of the foregoing discussion, the submission of the petitioner
that the decision of the Ministry of Power detailed in its office memorandum dated 17.06.2011 and
refusal by Energy Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh to provide recommendation letter
to import mining equipments for Sasan UMPP under nil custom duty amounts to a "Change in Law"
under Article 13.1 of the PPA and the petitioner is entitled to be compensated for the same is not
acceptable and hence no compensation would be available in this regard.” THE APPEAL BEFORE
THE TRIBUNAL (15) This led to the appeal being filed by the first respondent under Section 111 of
the Act. It is CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. apposite that we set out the exact case which
has been set up by the first respondent before the Tribunal.
“9.5 The Report identified the water intake pump house location and pipeline route from the intake
pump house to the power plant in its report. This report was made available to all the bidders before
bid submission so that the bidders could factor in the cost of water intake system in preparation of
their financial bids i.e., the tariff at which power be supplied to the Procurers. The total cost for the
construction of water intake system for the location and route of indicated in the report by WAPCOS
was estimated to be Rs.92 Crores. The water intake system is an integral part of the Project without
with it is not possible to set up and operate the Project. The WAPCOS report along with estimated
cost are annexed herewith and marked as Annexure A-14. 9.6 After RPower was declared the
successful bidder and the Appellant Company was transferred to RPower, WAPCOS was re-
appointed to confirm the technical feasibility as part of the detailed engineering exercise. During
this process, it emerged that the water intake location as finalized by WAPCOS vide its earlier report
prepared for PFC/ Procurers and made available to all bidders prior to bid submission was not an
appropriate location and does not ensure reliable supply of water to the power plant. It also emerged
that the water intake at the original location indicated by WAPCOS in the pre-bid report would have
resulted in shutdown of the power plant for a considerable period in a year CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. during the lean season. Therefore, WAPCOS recommended a new location for
water intake, which was 23 km from the power plant as against the 12.5 kms initially indicated at the
time of bidding (original location). It was highlighted that the new location would ensure reliable
water supply to the power plant. Due to increase in the distance, submergence area along the route
and construction time, there has been considerable increase in the cost of water intake system due
to change in location as detailed below. The report of WAPCOS recommending the revised location
is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure A-15. 9.7 It is submitted that due to the change in
location, cost for water intake system has increased on following counts:
(a) While the route length itself increased to 23 kms, the increase in piping length
increased from 24 km (2 Pipe Lines each of 12 Kms) to 59.5 km (2 Pipe Lines each of
8 km & 3 Pipes each of 14.5 km)
(b) Increased cost due to deeper Pump House.
(c) Additional dredging for creation of intake channel for the offshore pump house.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 17(d) Additional cost due to HT transmission line.
There has been considerable increase of approximately Rs.176 Crores in cost of the water intake
system, which now is estimated to be approximately Rs.268 Crores. The cost break-up for the new
location for the water intake system is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure A-16.
9.8 It is submitted that the increase in cost of the water intake system is on account of the errors in
the report provided CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. by the Procurers and therefore, the
Procurers are required to compensate the Appellant for the difference in cost. 9.9 It is further
submitted that since the water pipeline corridor is part of the Land for the Power Station and the
water intake pipeline is an integral part of the Power Station, any change in the indicative cost of the
water intake system is covered under Change in Law in terms of Article 13 of the PPA since it
amounts to change in cost of land of the Project. In fact, the Ld. General Commission has noted in
the impugned Order that the estimate for Declared Price of Land for the Power Station includes the
Water Intake System. The operative part of the Impugned Order is reproduced below:
“19. Change in the declared price of land is covered under “Change in Law”. The
procurers have also agreed that this item of expenditure is admissible under “Change
in Law”. The declared price of land for the Power Station was stated to be 190.677
crore. This has been verified from the communication dated 23.10.2006 from the
representative of the procurers to the bidders. This included the power plant area, the
fuel transport system land, the water pipeline corridor and the ash pipeline corridor.”
9.11 It is submitted that pre-bid site visit and project reports were prepared and made
available by Authorized Representative (Power Finance Corporation) to all bidders.
The disclaimer, if at all applicable, will only apply to such instances where the bidders were able to
identify any issues or liability with reasonable diligence. Based on the information and material
provided, there was no indication that the water CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. intake
system proposed in the WAPCOS Report was unfeasible. Therefore, the disclaimer does not absolve
the Procurers of their liability to compensate the Appellant for the increase in cost. It is submitted
that due to the error in WAPCOS’s report, the Appellant is faced with an additional burden of Rs.176
Crore which has adversely impacted the project economics. It is submitted that the disclaimers
contained in Para 2.7.2.1 and Para 4 of the RFQ ought not to be considered absolute in nature so as
to prevent loading of costs which are incurred by the Appellant as a direct result of omission or error
on part of the Procurers in providing information during the pre-bid stage. This approach is
counter-intuitive to ensuring that the Appellants Project is able to supply cheap and affordable
power to over 42 million consumers in the Procurer States. It is further submitted that the
disclaimers cannot act as an absolute bar to the liability of the Procurers. Any duty to independently
verify inputs, information factors etc. require only a reasonable duty of care. The grave technical
deficiencies and huge differences between actual cost and estimates provided to the bidders defeat
the fundamental objective of providing information to the bidders especially when the nature of
expense in this case was of buying a report from a Government Company which had carried out a
detailed study. The Appellant had no other option but to rely on the information provided by the
authorized representative of the Procurers. Therefore, Ld. Commission’s reliance on the disclaimersHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 18contained in the bid documents to reject the claim of the Appellant is not sustainable.” (16) In
regard to the complaint about the notification issued by the Joint Secretary in the CIVIL APPEAL
NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Ministry of Power having brought about a change in law, we find the
following complaint, inter alia:
“9.20. It is submitted that as per Notification 21 of 2022- Customs dated 01.03.2002
issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, the customs duty on goods
required for setting up mega projects has been prescribed as nil meaning thereby that
no customs duty will be levied on goods imported for setting up a mega power
project. Notification 21/2022- Customs which provides as under:
“ S. Chapter or Description of Goods Standard Additional Condition No. Heading or
Rate Duty Rate No. sub-heading (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 98.01 Goods required for
setting up any Mega Power Project specified in List 42 if such Mega Power is (a) An
inter-
state thermal power plant of 1000 MW or more (b) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of
500 MW or more As certified by an officer not below the rank of joint secretary to the Government
of India in the Ministry of Power.
9.22 It is submitted that captive Coal Blocks being an integral part of the Project, the mining
equipment would be covered under this provision as well. It is submitted that RFP clearly stated
that Procurers through the Appellant (which was a wholly-owned subsidiary of PFC at that time)
will procure a certificate from the Ministry of Power that the benefits of the Mega Power Policy
would CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. be extended to the Project till scheduled Commercial
Operations Date of the Power Station. As per definition, Project includes captive mine and hence, it
was Procurer’s obligation to provide for the exemption to the coal mining equipment.
9.24 It may also noted that:-
Xxx xxx xxx
(b) PPA defines Project as power plant along with captive coal mines.
9.35 It is submitted that the Appellant has set up an ultra-mega power project which comprises of
captive coal mines. It is not separately indulging in mining activities. Moreover, the coal from the
Project is being used only for the Project. The entire capital cost of the power project includes the
cost of the coal mines. This is also evident from Article 13 of the PPA where increase in cost of land
and R&R expenditure for the coal mines is included as change in law.
Therefore, the finding that the captive coal mines are a separate activity and will fall under Serial
No. 399 is incorrect and ought to be set aside.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 19FINDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL (17) As far as the complaint about the increased costs on account of
change in water intake system, the following is the finding of the Tribunal.
“12.4 After due consideration of the rival contentions of both the parties, what emerges is that after
being declared as the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. successful bidder, the SPL with a view
to affirm the technical suitability of the preliminary report of the WAPCOS on Water Intake System,
re-engaged the same agency for finalization of the said report. It is not in dispute that the
Consultant, WAPCOS reviewed its earlier report and came to a conclusion that the earlier location of
Water Intake was not at proper place and would result in non- availability of water for the plant
during lean period. It is relevant to note that based on the recommendations of WAPCOS, SPL
decided to go ahead for selection of new location as recommended and got carried out the requisite
design and engineering of the entire Water Intake System which resulted into longer piping system,
increased submergence area along the route, additional construction period etc.. On account of
these factors, the cost of Water Intake System went up by over Rs.176 crores. The learned counsel
appearing for the Appellant pointed out that the judgment of this Tribunal in Nabha Power case is
not applicable to the present case since no cost relating to seismic zone data was provided to Nabha
whereas in the instant case, costs were provided to the bidders. The Appellant has further reiterated
that para 2.7.2.1 and para 4 of RFP which were relied upon by the Respondent procurers cannot be
taken as obsolute in nature so as to absolve procurers of their responsibility for providing grossly
incorrect information leading to substantial increase in cost of Water Intake System.
12.5 After thoughtful consideration of the submissions made by the learned counsel for CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the Appellant and the Respondents and the findings of the Central
Commission, we find that while the responsibility of carrying out due diligence before bidding and
verifying the correctness of information provided in the bid documents rested with the bidders, at
the same time, Respondent procurers cannot justify providing grossly erroneous report on Water
Intake System taking shelter under the disclaimer in the bid document. As a matter of fact, the water
availability for a thermal power station of this magnitude on regular, reliable and uninterrupted
basis is essential and is a vital input for successful operation of the plant. It is noticed that the report
of WAPCOS supplied to bidders at the time of bidding was deficient in ensuring adequate water
supplies throughout the year uninterrupted and if the same would have been taken for construction
and implementation, the same could have resulted into huge loss to the Respondent procurers being
deprived of power supply for some period of the year due to less/ non-availability of water during
the lean period. It is not in dispute that Sasan UMPP is supplying power to the Respondent procurer
at one of the most competitive tariff in the country. It is noted from the contentions of the
Respondent procurers that such an issue has not been dealt with either in the PPA or in the
competitive bidding guidelines issued by Ministry of Power under Section 63 of the Act, however, in
view of the criticality of such situation, we opine that the matter needs afresh re-look for suitable
redressal. While the Central Commission has correctly concluded that it does not qualify as change
in law under CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Articles 13.1.1 of the PPA, it, however, needs to
be addressed on the basis of settled principles of law and equity also, in the light of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court findings in its judgment at Para 19 in Energy Watchdog vs. CERC dated 11.04.2017.
Thus, we are of the considered view that this issue involving substantial additional expenditure
basically arising out of erroneous report of the consultants needs to be re-examined afresh by theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 20Central Commission. Hence, this issue is answered in favour of the Appellant.” (18) In regard to the
complaint relating to the O.M. dated 17.06.2011 forming change in law, we note the following
findings:
“14.5 We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the Appellant
and learned counsel for the Respondents along with the consideration of the Central
Commission on this issue pertaining to the claims of the Appellant regarding
compensation on account of additional payment towards custom duty on mining
equipment. After careful consideration and critical evaluation of the same, the key
question arises for consideration, whether the equipment required for captive coal
mines allocated to UMPP should be considered at par with the equipment required
for setting up the power plants as far as exemption from the custom duty is
concerned. The contention of the Appellant that the captive coal mines allocated to
Sasan UMPP are integral & essential part of the project as a whole and CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. as such, the exemption of custom duty was
applicable to all equipments being imported for the entire project i.e. captive coal
mines as well as power plants. It is not in dispute that the captive coal mines were
allotted for UMPP for its exclusive use for power generation and in no way, meant for
commercial utilization elsewhere.
14.6 In this regard, we also take the note of Hon’ble Supreme Court directions in
judgment dated 24.08.2014 in Manohar Lal Sharma Vs. Principal Secy., in
W.P.(CRL) 120 of 2012 (Para 158) that coal from captive coal mines is to be used for
UMPP alone and no diversion of coal for commercial exploitation would be
permitted. Keeping these facts in view, we notice the glowing difference between an
independent coal mines up for exploitation and selling coal on commercial lines and
a captive coal mine set up to meet requirement of UMPP only to generate power for
the ultimate benefit of the Respondent procurers and in turn, consumers for
obtaining electricity at cheaper rates. The actual positions purported the assumption
made by the Appellant that the customs duty exemptions will be available for import
of the equipment for the entire project including captive mines and power plants. We
find force in the argument of the learned counsel for the Appellant that being the
integral and inseparable part of the UMPP, the custom duty rates applicable for stand
alone coal mining projects would not be applicable in the present case and the
exemption would need to be given effect to.
We, thus opine that the Central Commission CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. appears to
have been mechanically guided by the mere description of the relevant entry (Sl.No.399 & 400) in
the said custom duty notifications and has not appreciated that the captive coal mines being integral
part of the UMPP cannot be equated to a stand alone coal mines, having commercial line of
utilization. The Appellant was thus right in assuming that Custom Duty exemption will be available
for the coal mining equipments. As such, this issue needs to be examined afresh in accordance with
law and various provisions of the RFQ/RFP/PPA. Therefore, we answer this issue in favour of the
Appellant.” (19) On the basis of the aforesaid findings, the Tribunal remanded the matter back to theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 21Commission. We may also notice the sequel to the impugned judgment. Pursuant to the remand, the
Commission reconsidered the matter in regard to the water intake. The Commission ordered
payment of sum of Rs.176 crores. As far as the claim for compensation on the basis that the issuance
of the office memorandum by the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power having brought about a
change in law, it was found that the goods in question had been imported not by the first respondent
but by its parent company. This, in turn, has triggered two sets of CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. appeals again before the Tribunal and they are still pending. Their fate, undoubtedly, will
depend upon the decision which we will be rendering in these cases.
(20) We have heard Mr. P. Chidambaram, Mr. Dhruv Mehta, Mr. Rana Mukherjee, Mr. M. G.
Ramachandran, Mr. G. Umapathy, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr. Nikunj Dayal and Ms.
Pallavi Sehgal. We have also heard Mr. Shubham Arya, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant in one of the appeals. On the other hand, we also heard Mr. Sajjan Poovayya, learned
senior counsel assisted by Mr.Rahul Kinra, learned counsel and Mr. Amit Kapoor, learned counsel.
SUBMISSION OF APPELLANTS (21) Shri P. Chidambaram, learned senior counsel appearing for
the appellant, would submit that the Tribunal has clearly acted in error and illegally in passing the
impugned order.
(22) He would submit that as far as the finding CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. given by the
Tribunal in regard to the water intake system being located at a different place, is concerned, the
Tribunal agreed with the Commission that there was no change in law. Once, it was found that there
was no change in law, there is no power with the Tribunal to do what it did. The PPA signifies an
agreement between the parties. The PPA goes into meticulous details. It follows an internationally
competitive bidding and the obligations of the parties have been carved out and articulated with
great care. Once the party, viz., the first respondent went to the Commission complaining that there
is a change in law and it was found that there is no change in law, there ended the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. Instead of terminating the lis, the Tribunal has clearly strayed outside its jurisdiction in
granting relief on the basis that report of WAPCOS was grossly erroneous. In this regard, he enlisted
in support of his contention, various clauses which unambiguously disclaimed any liability with the
procurers on account of any inaccuracies which may CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. be
reflected in the WAPCOS report. A report submitted by WAPCOS which is a public sector body was
only by way of providing information. The bidders were provided with the report well before they
decided to put in their bids. Having regard to the various disclaimer clauses, it did not lie in their
mouth to thereafter seek to construct a case based on the report being erroneous. In this regard, it is
pointed out that the clauses clearly indicate that the bidder was to satisfy itself by conducting a
study of the site. Nothing prevented the first respondent from carrying out inspection of the site and
verifying for itself the information which was provided through the report of the WAPCOS. (23) Mr.
P. Chidambaram, learned senior counsel, further pointed out that a perusal of the second WAPCOS
report, which is the sole basis for the huge claim raised by the first respondent, would show that the
second report does not, in any manner, rubbish the first report. It is not in dispute, it is pointed out,
that the procurers were in no way associated with the carrying out of the second CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. WAPCOS report. Unilaterally, the first respondent without any basis gets the
second report commissioned and it is on the said basis alone that the claim was made and what isHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 22more, allowed by the Tribunal. This is clearly impermissible. As regards the claim for compensation
alleging change in law brought about by the Office Memorandum issued by the Joint Secretary is
concerned, in the first place, it is pointed out that the proper thing for the first respondent to do
would have been to take up the matter with the Department and claim a refund and he would
submit it is strange instead of doing that the burden is sought to be passed on to the procurers and
which, in turn, would necessarily be passed on to the ultimate consumers. (24) Further, it is pointed
out that the Tribunal has actually proceeded to take into consideration the earlier notifications
which prevailed at the time of the cut off date with reference to which alone change in law is
projected. Thereafter, it has come to the conclusion that for the goods imported from abroad for the
purpose of the captive CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. mines, there was an exemption. Such
an inquiry itself could not have been done. In other words, it is not a case where the first respondent
had indisputable material on hand which established unambiguously that there was a change in law.
This is for the reason that there is no material to establish that prior to the cut off date, the goods
which are the subject matter of dispute, were exempt under the notification. On the other hand, our
attention is drawn to the decision of the Advance ruling authority which has gone into the issue and
found that goods in question were not exempt. In fact, it is the contention of the appellants that the
office memorandum issued by the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power, merely follows the advance
ruling.
(25) Another argument which is raised in this regard is that the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of
Power is not the final Governmental authority within the meaning of clause 13.1.1. What we are
concerned with is notification issued under Section 25 of the Customs Act. It is not as if any
authority which is CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. competent within the meaning of Article
13.1.1 has issued a notification or even an interpretation within the meaning of the said article which
has resulted in a change in law within the meaning of Article 13.1.1.
(26) We have also heard Shri Dhruv Mehta, as we have already stated. We have heard the other
senior counsel who have essentially adopted the arguments which have been addressed by Mr.
P.Chidambaram, learned senior counsel, and they are one in contending that the Tribunal has
strayed outside the contours of its jurisdiction and this has resulted in an order which is clearly
illegal and erroneous. SUBMISSIONS OF THE FIRST RESPONDENT (27) Per contra, Mr. Sajjan
Poovayya, learned senior counsel for the first respondent, took us through the other side of the
picture and projected a totally different scenario. He would point out, in the first place, that the
Court may not view the PPA in question as an ordinary contract. He pointed out that what is at stake
is the interpretation to be CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. placed on a long term power
procurement contract. It is not as if in such a contract, the matters are fixed with reference to the
point of time when the contract is entered into. It is not cast in stone, in other words. It is open to
change. More appropriately, it is open to regulation. We are invited to consider that the Act
represents a paradigm shift from the previous regime under which the price of power was fixed
essentially at the whims and caprice of the State Electricity Boards. There was a stagnation in the
production and supply of power. It is realising the need for increasing private participation in the
generation of power that the Act was enacted in the year 2003. Being the subject matter of
regulations means that tariff was open to be revisited from time to time. It is precisely this regime
which is reflected by Section 79 of the Act. It is further pointed out that the complaint of theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 23appellants regarding the Tribunal in regard to the water intake system despite agreeing with the
Commission that there was no change in law rendering the findings it did and CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. therefore, being unsustainable, the Court may consider that in fact there was a
change in law. This argument is sought to be buttressed with reference to the provisions of clause
(iii) of Article 13.1.1. It is contended, in other words, that a perusal of the various clauses of the PPA
would show that the procurers (the appellants) were obliged under the contract to provide initial
consent. One of the initial consents related to the water linkage for the project. He would submit
that in view of the provisions of Schedule II to the PPA the initial consent also consisted of carrying
out the task of making available land for the power plant and for the laying of the pipeline. Since as
it turned out and as supported by the second report of the WAPCOS, there was clearly insufficient
availability of water at the site supported by the first report, the first respondent was compelled to
take water from a distant point of the reservoir in question. This led to the colossal increase in the
expenditure towards laying of the pipeline inter alia. This constituted, therefore, a change in law.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (28) As far as the contention based on the disclaimer
clauses which are relied upon by the appellant is concerned, it is pointed out that the width of the
disclaimer clause could not be stretched to the point that is canvassed by the appellants. We are
dealing with a case where a public sector unit viz., WAPCOS has given its report. Not unnaturally,
the first respondent relied upon the same. It is factored in its price and once it is found that the
report was entirely fallacious, no shelter can be sought by the appellants under the disclaimer
clauses. Our attention was drawn to various judgments. They include Energy Watchdog v. Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others (2017) 14 SCC 80, Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam
Ltd. & Anr. v. Adani Power Limited & Ors. (2019) 5 SCC 325, Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Essar
Power (2008) 4 SCC 755, Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravan & Ors. (1987) 2 SCC
654, DLF Universal Limited v. Director, Town and Country Planning Department, Haryana (2010)
14 SCC 1 and Sumitomo CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Heavy Industries v. Oil and Natural
Gas Commission of India (2010) 11 SCC 296, Nabha Power Limited v. PSPCL (2018) 11 SCC 508.
(29) The respondents have also relied upon the judgments of this Court which are detailed
hereinafter essentially for the proposition that there is power under Order XLI Rule 22 and Rule 33:
Prahlad & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Anr. (2010) 10 SCC 458, State of Punjab &
Ors. v. Bakshish Singh (1998) 8 SCC 222, Mahant Dhangir & Anr. v. Madan Mohan &
Ors. (1987) (Supp) SCC 528.
(30) It is contended by Mr. Sajjan Povayya, learned senior counsel that there is indeed power, at any
rate, under the provisions of Section 79(1)(b) of the Act to revisit the fixation of tariff de hors even
the specific relief which is contemplated under the contract. In this regard, emphasis is laid on the
fact that clauses 4.7 and 5.1.17 of the guidelines came to be amended and it is the amended
guidelines which apply to the facts of the case. That it is the amended guidelines which were applied
can be perceived from the fact that the amended CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. guidelines
are seen reflected in the PPA. The amended provisions are found in 17.3.1 and 13.1.1 (31) Amended
Guideline 4.7 is reflected in 13.1.1 whereas amended guideline 5.17 is reflected in Article 17.3.1.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 24(32) With regard to 17.3.1, it is pointed out that a reading of the same, in particular, the opening
limb of the provision would show that there is clearly general power for the purpose of changing
determining or increasing the tariff. It is sought to be contrasted with specific instances which would
notify the jurisdiction of the Commission which included Article 13.1 which deals with change in
law. In other words, the contention is that de hors a change in law, it becomes the duty of the
Commission and the Tribunal and of this Court to factor in the need to arm the Tribunal and the
Commission with ample power in the interest of justice, to deal with situations which call out for a
fair and equitable treatment to be meted out to the private player as well in a long term contract.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (33) Mr. Amit Kapoor, learned counsel, who supplemented
the submissions of Mr.Sajjan Poovayya, learned senior counsel, would draw our attention to Section
61 of the Act. He would submit that Section 61 read with Sections 63 to 79(b) provided a statutory
framework which enabled the Commission to devise an equitable tariff even in a PPA governed
scenario having regard to the very nature of the services involved and the changed system evolved
under the Act.
(34) Mr. Amit Kapoor, learned counsel, laid stress on the principle of contra proferentem. He would
point out along with Mr. Sajjan Poovyya, learned senior counsel, that the Court must not be
oblivious of the fact that this case represents a case 2 scenario under the RFP. This means that
unlike a situation where the contractor is free to choose the site and the other facilities, in a case 2
situation which is the situation prevailing in this case, everything is dictated to by the employer viz.,
SPV. Expatiating the said point, it is pointed out that the bidders did not have a control over the
water CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. source from which water had to be taken. In other
words, the water could not have been sourced from any other water body. This aspect is relevant for
the purpose of considering the free play with the Commission in the matter of fixing tariff based on a
situation which was created as are exemplified by two grounds which have been made out and which
are the subject matter of the appeals. Another point which is projected is that in regard to geological
matters, the bidders were warned that they would have to on their own make an assessment. But
such a caveat was not entered with regard to pertinently the hydrological conditions. Since water
intake system related to hydrology, it is not open to the appellants to ward off a just fixation of tariff
based on the discovery of the fact that the first WAPCOS report was highly flawed. We are reminded
that it was of the greatest importance for the first respondent that it ran the power plant on a yearly
basis. The second report of the WAPCOS would clearly indicate that if the appellant had to take
water in terms of the first WAPCOS report, during CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the lean
months, the first respondent would not get sufficient water supply to operate the plant. If such an
eventuality had taken place, the result would be that the procurers would end up paying the charges
towards capacity charge even though, it would not get power. The appellants would be compelled to
buy power from outside and finally the end consumer would have to bear the brunt of the loss. It is
to avoid all this that the first respondent has acted in a manner which was not only in tune with its
best interest but also ensuring that the procurers and finally the consumers were best protected. It is
further pointed out by the learned counsel that the Court must bear in mind that the contract in
question permits the passing of the benefit not only to the contractor but also to the employer viz.,
the appellants. In other words, if it was a case where the first respondent were to be found to be
making an unjust enrichment under the regulatory mechanism, the appellants could have moved
the Commission for bringing down the rates. Therefore, the regulatory mechanism is meant to workHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 25CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. both ways, in both directions and the Court must bear in
mind the unique nature of a regulated contract.
(35) Shri Amit Kapoor also referred to the theory of incomplete contracts. This is explained as
meaning that being a long term contact, the parties may not expect and factor in all possible
developments which may take place. This also necessitates the Commission being endowed with
sufficient power to reach the contractor as also the employer a just tariff bearing in mind the regime
under Section 61 of the Act.
(36) Upon being queried as to what would be the position at law outside of the PPA and of the
jurisdiction of the Commission and if the matter were to be considered with reference to the law of
contract, Shri Amit Kapoor drew our attention to Sections 18 and 19 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872. He would point out that even an innocent representation within the meaning of Section 18 can
result in the contact becoming voidable under Section 19. Section 19 contemplates that the party
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. whose consent is obtained by misrepresentation within the
meaning of Section 18 can insist upon the other side to perform the contact. But the wronged party
retained the right to insist that it shall be put in the same position it would have occupied if there
was no misrepresentation. Therefore, it is pointed out that there is foundation even in the law of
contract for contending that the Commission armed with its powers under Section 79(b) could
compensate the contractor in the situation we are concerned with.
(37) The judgment of this Court reported in Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited v. National
Thermal Power Corporation Limited and Others (2009) 6 SCC 235 rendered by a Bench of three
learned judges with Justice S. B. Sinha speaking for the Court had occasion to consider the impact of
regulations made purporting to act under the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. In the
said judgment, it has been inter alia held that there is power under regulation 92, in particular, to
revise the tariff (see para 35 read with 38 and CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
40) (38) Noticing this aspect, when we sought assistance from the learned counsel. We heard the
following submissions. Mr. M. G. Ramachandran, learned senior counsel, would point out that the
observations relating to the power under Section 92 must be understood as confined to the situation
obtaining under Section 61 read with Section 62 of the Act. The said power may not be available
when the tariff is fixed under Section 63 of the Act. When we queried as to whether the provisions of
Section 61 are totally unconnected with Section 63, Mr. M. G. Ramachandran, learned senior
counsel, would submit that Section 61 may not be entirely inapplicable. He would submit that
particular provisions of Section 61 may, in fact, apply. They include Section 61(b). He would submit
that even the guidelines issued under Section 63 have their echo in Section 61 and, therefore, it
cannot be said that Section 61 and 63 are strange bedfellows.
(39) He would, however, contend that in no circumstances can the power under regulation 92 of
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 1999 regulations apply when parties have after competitive
bidding and approval of the tariff under Section 63 become bound by a long term contract under the
PPA. In a case where there is a determination of tariff within the meaning of Section 62, on the other
hand, Regulations of 1999 may apply. He would further point out that the power under regulationHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 2692 which provides for reviewing of tariff and which has been understood as power of revision of
tariff as a whole must be subject to the rider that the revision of tariff can be done only strictly in
accordance with the tariff regulations brought in the year 2001 and as subsequently, amended from
time to time. In fact, he would draw our attention to the Regulations of 2014 which expressly
excludes tariff determination done under Section 63 of the Act from the ambit of the said regulation.
In this regard, Shri Sajjan Povayya, learned senior counsel, on the other hand, drew our attention to
the judgment of this Court Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v. Tarini Infrastructure Limited and
Others (2016) 8 SCC 743 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 2022 SCC Online SC 1615 2023
SCC Online SC 233. He would on the strength of these judgments point out that there is regulatory
power available even in a case covered by Section 63 of the Act. ANALYSIS (40) We, in these cases,
are concerned only with two issues. As we have noticed, the first respondent filed a petition before
the Commission invoking its power inter alia under Section 79(b). The matter relates expressly to
the construction period. It is at this point apposite to notice the relevant provisions under the PPA.
(41) Article 13 deals with change in law. Article 13.1.1. defines what a change in law is. It reads as
follows:
       “ARTICLE 13:     CHANGE IN LAW
              13.1      Definitions
In this Article 13, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
13.1.1 “Change in Law” means the occurrence of any of the following events after the
date, which is seven(7) days prior to the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Bid
Deadline:
(i) the enactment, bringing into effect, adoption, promulgation, amendment,
modification or repeal, of any Law or (ii) a change in the interpretation of any Law by
a Competent Court of Law, tribunal or Indian Governmental Instrumentality
provided such Court of Law, tribunal or Indian Governmental Instrumentality is final
authority under law of such interpretation or (iii) change in any consents, approvals
or licenses available or obtained for the Project, otherwise than for default of the
Seller, which results in any change in any cost of or revenue from the business of
selling electricity by the Seller to the Procurers under the terms of this Agreement, or
(iv) any change in the
(a) Declared Price of Land for the Project or (b) the cost of implementation of the
resettlement and rehabilitation package of the land for the Project mentioned in RFP
or (c) the cost of implementing Environmental Management Plan for the Power
Station mentioned in the RFP or (d) the cost of implementing compensatory
afforestation for the Coal Mine, indicated under the RFP and the PPA;Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 27but shall not include (i) any change in any withholding tax on income or dividends distributed to the
shareholders of the Seller, or (ii) change in respect of UI Charges or frequency intervals by an
Appropriate Commission.
Provided that if Government of India does not extend the income tax holiday for power generation
projects under Section 80 IA of the Income Tax Act, upto the Scheduled Commercial Operation Date
of the Power Station, such non-extension shall be deemed to be a Change in Law.” CIVIL APPEAL
NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (42) Article 13.1.2 declares that the Supreme Court or High Court or a
Tribunal or in similar judicial or quasi judicial body in India that has jurisdiction to adjudicate upon
issues relating to the project will be treated as competent Court. (43) Article 13.2 provides for the
actual application and the principles for computing the impact of change in law. It reads as follows:
“13.2 Application and Principles for computing impact of Change in Law.
While determining the consequence of Change in Law under this Article 13, the
Parties shall have due regard to the principle that the purpose of compensating the
Party affected by such Change in Law, is to restore through Monthly Tariff Payments,
to the extent contemplated in this Article 13, the affected Party to the same economic
position as if such Change in Law has not occurred.
a) Construction Period As a result of any Change in Law, the impact of
increase/decrease of Capital Cost of the Project in the Tariff shall be governed by the
formula given below:
For every cumulative increase/decrease of each Rupees Fifty crores (Rs.50 crores) in
the Capital Cost over the term of this Agreement, the increase/decrease in Non CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Escalable Capacity Charges shall be an amount
equal to zero point two six seven (0.267%) of the Non Escalable Capacity Charges.
Provided that the Seller provides to the Procurers documentary proof of such
increase/decrease in Capital cost for establishing the impact of such Change in Law.
In case of Dispute, Article 17 shall apply.
It is clarified that the above mentioned compensation shall be payable to either Party,
only with effect from the date on which the total increase/decrease exceeds amount
of Rs. Fifty (50)crores.
b) Operation Period As a result of Change in Law, the compensation for any
increase/decrease in revenues or cost to the Seller shall be determined and effect
from such date, as decided by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission whose
decision shall be final and binding on both the Parties, subject to rights of appeal
provided under applicable Law.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 28Provided that the above mentioned compensation shall be payable only if and for
increase/decrease in revenues or cost to the seller is in excess of an amount
equivalent to 1% of Letter of Credit in aggregate for a Contact Year.
(44) Article 13.4.2 provides for the manner in which CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. the payment for changes in law is to be effected.
It reads as follows:
“13.4.2 The payment for Changes in Law shall be through Supplementary Bill as
mentioned in Article 11.8. However, in case of any change in Tariff by reason of
Change in Law, as determined in accordance with this Agreement, the Monthly
Invoice to be raised by the Seller after such change in Tariff shall appropriately reflect
the changed Tariff.” (45) We may notice the other foundational articles relied upon
by the first respondent. Article 17 relates to Governing law and Dispute resolution.
Article 17.2.1 reads as follows:
“17.2.1 Either Party is entitled to raise any claim, dispute or difference of whatever
nature arising under, out of or in connection with this Agreement including its
existence or validity or termination (collectively “Dispute”) by giving a written notice
to the other Party, which shall contain:
(i) a description of the Dispute;
(ii) the grounds for such Dispute; and
(iii) all written material in support of its claim.” (46) The further articles which we
need not capture contemplate that the claim may be met even with a counter claim
and an attempt should be made to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. settle the
dispute amicably (see Article 17.2.3).
Failure to arrive at a settlement opens the doors of Article 17.3. It is justifiable as the caption is
‘Dispute Resolution’.
(47) Article 17.3.1 is the crucial article. It reads: -
“Where any Dispute arises from a claim made by any Party for any change in or
determination of the Tariff or any matter related to Tariff or claims made by any
Party which partly or wholly relate to any change in the Tariff or determination of any
of such claims could result in change in the Tariff or (ii) relates to any matter agreed
to be referred to the Appropriate Commission under Articles 4.7.1, 13.2, 18.1 or clause
10.1.3 of Schedule l 7 hereof, such Dispute shall be submitted to adjudication by the
Appropriate Commission. Appeal against the decisions of the AppropriateHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 29Commission shall be made only as per the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, as
amended from time to time. The obligations of the Procurers under this Agreement
towards the Seller shall not be affected in any manner by reason of inter- se disputes
amongst the Procurers.” (48) It is thereafter that as we have noticed, Article 17.3.2
appears which we are not setting out, deals with the settlement of disputes which are
outside the ambit of Article 17.3.1.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (49) We may at the very beginning notice the change that is
brought about in the guideline. True it is that as we have noticed that the earlier guidelines which
were formulated on 19.01.2005 contemplated a different regime both as regards change in law and
also dispute resolution. The question would however be the extent to which the first respondent can
derive benefit out of the same. As far as Article 13.1.1 is concerned, clauses 1 and 2 are clearly an
inapplicable in regard to the claim based on the change brought about in the water intake system.
(50) It is clause (iii) which is referred to and relied upon by Mr. Sajjan Povayya. It reads as follows:
“(iii) change in any consents, approvals or licenses available or obtained for the
Project, otherwise than for default of the Seller, which results in any change in any
cost of or revenue from the business of selling electricity by the Seller to the
Procurers under the terms of this Agreement.” (51) It is the case of the first
respondent that since in the schedule the initial consent which was, CIVIL APPEAL
NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. in fact, a deemed initial consent consisting of performing of
the task of making available land for the power plant and for the pipeline and there is
a change in the same in view of what transpired pursuant to the second report of the
WAPCOS, the first respondent was entitled to relief. In regard to the said argument,
we must notice the following obstacles which are indisputable. We notice that the
pleadings which we have set out, position before the Commission and what is more,
even before the Tribunal, do not reveal that the first respondent has taken such a
stand. No express reference is found to Schedule 2 containing the alleged deemed
initial consent being overridden by the subsequent consent as a foundation for the
claim based on change in law.
(52) The second obstacle which we must notice is that we are dealing with an appeal
under Section 125 which is based on the existence of a substantial question of law. In
this regard, indisputably both the Commission and the Tribunal have rendered the
concurrent finding that the first respondent has CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. failed to establish any change in law. Thus, the first respondent is up against
concurrent findings which we cannot lightly disregard.
(53) Thirdly, we may notice that the first respondent has not independently
challenged the finding rendered by the Tribunal holding that there is no change in
law. We have noticed that the Tribunal has proceeded to premise the grant of relief to
the first respondent and remanding the matter on a totally different basis. Here, we
may notice no doubt that treating it as a part of the power of appellate Court to
correct errors in the findings in the impugned order passed may extend inHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 30appropriate cases by the principle of Order XLI Rule
22. However, objection is seen raised by the Appellants to permitting of the principle
in Order XLI Rule 22 CPC to govern in the situation such as in an appeal under
Section 125 of the Act. We proceed on the basis that there is power to permit the
respondent to impugn a finding given by the Tribunal against the respondent even
without filing any appeal or cross petition.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (54) Examining the claim on merits, we find that the first
respondent would fail. It is categorically stated in para 68 of the petition that the increase in the cost
is directly attributable to the error in the WAPCOS report provided to the bidders at the pre-bid
stage. It is contended that the first respondent is required to be compensated for the same.
(55) In para 108, it is stated that as per the RFP, the procurers had to provide the water intake study
report. As per the said report, the cost of water intake system was approximately Rs.92 crores. It is
further stated in para 110 that there was considerable increase in the cost of water due to the water
intake system. It is stated that it is on account of errors in the report. It is, however, no doubt, in
para 111 stated that since water pipeline is part of the power station land and the water intake
pipeline is an integral part of the power station, the indicative cost of the water intake system will be
covered by change in law. In the appeal also, we have noticed the stand elaborately. CIVIL APPEAL
NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (56) Initial consent, has been defined in the PPA as meaning the consents
listed in Schedule 2. Article 5.5 of the PPA reads as follows:
“5.5 Consents The Seller shall be responsible for obtaining all Consents (other than
those required for the Interconnection and Transmission Facilities and the Initial
Consents) required for developing, financing, constructing, operating and
maintenance of the Project and maintaining/renewing all such Consents in order to
carry out its obligations under this Agreement in general and this Article 5 in
particular and shall supply to the Lead Procurer promptly with copies of each
application that it submits, and copy/ies of each consent/approval/license which it
obtains. For the avoidance of doubt, it is clarified that the Seller shall also be
responsible for maintaining/renewing the Initial Consents and for fulfilling all
conditions specified therein.” (57) It is true that the procurers were to secure certain
initial consents whereas the vast majority of the consents were to be procured by the
seller.
Whatever was to be procured by the procurers apparently has been described as initial consents. It
is also not in dispute that though the word consent is used in Article 13.1.1, the initial consent would
also qualify as consent. The CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. contention of the appellants is
that as far as the initial consent contemplated which was to be performed by the procurers it was to
provide the water linkage. The water linkage consisted of making available the source of water which
consisted of the Govind Ballabh Pant Sagar(Rihand Reservoir). There has been no change in the said
consent. It is not a case of the first respondent, in other words, that the first respondent has been
forced to take water from any other water source. In this regard by communication datedHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 3123.10.2006, we find the following:
“6. Reference Clause: RFP 1.4(v) – regarding tying up water linkage for the Project
requirement alongwith approval of Central Water Commissioner
(i) This has already been provided on 12th October, 2006.
(ii) The water intake study report and Project Report including geo-technical study,
topographical survey, area drainage study, socio-economic study and EIA rd (rapid),
were provided on 3 August, 2006.” (58) While on this document, we may also notice
the following in regard to the declared price of land contemplated in the RFP under
clause 1.4 (ii):
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. “2. Reference Clause: RFP 1.4(ii) – regarding
Declared Price of Land for Power Station Indicative Declared Price of Land for Power
Station is as follows:
       (i)     Power Plant Area – Rs.110 Crores
       (ii)    MGR Land – Rs.80 Crores.
(iii) Water Pipeline Corridor– Rs.0.63 Crores
(iv) Ash Pipeline Corridor – Rs.0.047 Crores” (59) There is no dispute regarding this
aspect. In this regard, we notice that under Schedule 1A to the PPA it has been clearly
indicated that water source in the project is Govind Ballabh Pant Sagar(Rihand
Reservoir).
(60) It is, thereafter, we must notice that under the caption initial consent in
Schedule 2, on behalf of the procurers, the SPV was expected to issue the notification
under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, obtain necessarily environmental and
forest clearance for the power stations, allocate captive coal mines and finally, give
the water linkage for the reasonable project requirements. It is this water linkage for
the reasonable project requirements which was contemplated to be fulfilled from the
water source Govind Ballabh Pant CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
Sagar(Rihand Reservoir). The communication dated 23.10.2006 would indicate that
the Central Water Commission had given its approval for sourcing the water need
from the water body in question. In the said sense, the procurers had fulfilled their
obligation as contemplated in RFP.
(61) The RFP which preceded the PPA provided for certain conditions which we have already
indicated. Clause 1.4 inter alia contained undertaking for providing the water linkage for the project
with the requisite approval of the Central Water Commission at least 30 days prior to Bid deadline.
In the PPA, it is indicated that the procurers have completed the initial studies as contained in the
project report and obtained initial consent required for the project which are set out in Part I of
Schedule 2 and have been made available to the seller on the date of the PPA except two matters: (1)Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 32Forest clearance and the declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act. It is in Part I
Schedule 2 of the PPA stated that the notification under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act was
an act to be CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. performed by the procurers. It is this act which
was not done initially at the stage of the PPA. Also forest clearance is mentioned in the Part I of
Schedule 2. Even the said clearance was also apparently not obtained as is indicated at the
beginning of the PPA. Thereafter, Part II of Schedule 2 contains the clause which is the
fountainhead of the argument based on initial consent.
(62) It contemplated performing of the task mentioned in Article 3.1.2A also shall be part of the
initial consent on their completion within the time provided. Article 3.1.2A contemplated
performance of the task with which we are concerned viz., making available the land for the power
plant and for the water intake pipeline. This task was to be performed within a period of eight
months from the date of the letter of intent being issued or six months from the PPA whichever is
later. It is true that the task which was to be performed by the procurers in terms of Article 3.1.2A
was performed belatedly by the procurers. In other words, the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. time limit was overshot by nearly 18 months. But this delay is not the basis for the claim based
on change in law.
(63) The question would then arise as to whether the delay in the performance of the task which has
been characterised on its performance within the time as a deemed initial consent would lead to a
change in law within the meaning of Article 13.1.1. We find that Article 3.3.3 of the PPA reads as
follows:
“3.3.3 In case of inability of the Seller to fulfil the conditions specified in Article 3.1.2
due to any Force Majeure event, the time period for fulfilment of the Condition
Subsequent as mentioned in Article 3.1.2 and Article 3.1.2A, shall be extended for the
period of such Force Majeure event, subject to a maximum extension period of ten
(10) Months, continuous or non-continuous in aggregate. Thereafter, this Agreement
may be terminated by either the Procurers (jointly) or the Seller by giving a notice of
at least seven (7) days, in writing to the other Party.
Similarly, in case of inability of the Procurers to fulfil the conditions specified in Article 3.1.2A due
to any Force Majeure event, the time period for fulfillment of the Condition subsequent as
mentioned in Article 3.1.2 and Article 3.1.2A, shall be extended period of ten (10) Months,
continuous or non-continuous in aggregate. Thereafter, this Agreement may be terminated by either
the Procurers (jointly) or the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Seller by giving a notice of at
least seven (7) days, in writing to the other Party.” (64) We must next notice Article 3.3.3A which
follows:
“3.3.3A In case of inability of the Procurers to perform the activities specified in
Article 3.1.2A within the time period specified therein, otherwise than for the reasons
directly attributable to the Seller or Force Majeure event, the Condition Subsequent
as mentioned in Article 3.1.2 would be extended on a ‘day for day’ basis, equal to the
additional time which may be required by the Procurers to complete the activitiesHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 33mentioned in Article 3.1.2A, subject to a maximum additional time of six (6) Months.
Thereafter, this Agreement may be terminated by the Seller at its option, by giving a
notice of at least seven (7) days, in writing to the Procurers. If the Seller elects to
terminate this Agreement, the Procurers shall, within a period of thirty days,
purchase the entire shareholding in the Seller for the following amount. Provided
such purchase of shares shall be undertaken by the Procurers in the ratio of their
then existing Allocated Contracted Capacity:
a) total amount of purchase price paid by the Successful Bidder to the shareholders of
the Seller acquire the equity shares of the Seller as per the RFP; plus
b) total amount of the Declared Price of Land and Geological Report (GR) to the
extent already paid by the Seller after the acquisition of its 100% shareholding by the
Selected Bidder; plus
c) an additional sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the sum total of the amounts
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b).
In addition, the Performance Guarantee of the Seller shall also be released forthwith.” (65) A perusal
of the aforesaid articles would reveal that the parties have provided for the consequences of failure
on the part of the procurers to make available land as contemplated in Article 3.1.2A. The long and
short of it is that if a certain timelimit is crossed by the procurers in the performance of its
obligations in this regard, the seller (the first respondent) has been given the right to repudiate the
contract. What is more, it could insist on the procurers purchasing the entire share capital of the
company viz., the first respondent as provided therein. It is not the case of the first respondent that
by invoking the aforesaid articles, the first respondent purported to repudiate the contract. On the
other hand, it is the common case that the contract continued to be alive and it has survived subject
to the claims which have been raised thereunder. This would mean CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. that as the consequences of failure to perform the task having been provided in the
contract in the manner provided, we should not ordinarily tarry further to ask as to whether this
would provide the premise for a change in law as contemplated under Article 13.1.1. We necessarily
pose the question still, whether this would be change in law. Not that we are unmindful of the fact
that the two bodies have concurrently found that there is no change in law and the attempt is to
dislodge such a finding by a side wind in the manner of speaking by an attack lodged by the
respondent in the appeal. This is not a case where the first respondent has made use of the land for
the purpose of laying the pipeline through the corridor as contemplated and found that drawing
water from the water intake system as contemplated would have resulted in water not being
available in sufficient quantity through the length of the year. There is no such case. (66) The case of
the first respondent, on the other hand, is that the PPA having been signed on 07.08.2007, in the
second week of December of the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. very same year-2007, in
order to confirm the availability of water through water intake system as contemplated in the first
WAPCOS report, the second report was commissioned ironically through the very same consultant.
There is no case, whatsoever, that having made attempts to draw water in terms of the first
WAPCOS report and having found that such an effort failed, they were compelled to seek recourse toHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 34a second study albeit by the same body. No reasons are forthcoming as to what inspired the first
respondent to commission the second study. Secondly, this is not a case where the procurers
brought about any change in law in the study on their own or they persuaded or compelled the first
respondent to change the corridor for the route for laying of the pipeline. The first respondent did
not even involve the procurers in the second study. There is no intimation given that the first
respondent was commissioning a new study. There is no basis forthcoming as to what prompted the
first respondent to commission a fresh study. What is stated is only that it wished to confirm the
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. availability of water in terms of the first water intake study.
In other words, we must sum up as follows:
(67) Even in terms of the case built around Part II of Schedule 2 to the PPA under
which the performing of the task mentioned in Article 3.1.2A within the time
provided was to be treated as a deemed initial consent, the consequence of failure to
do that have been expressly spelt out as we have already noticed.
At best or at worst, it could have empowered the first respondent to rescind the contract. That apart,
we are not in a position, for the reasons which we have indicated already, to come to the conclusion
that it would amount to change in law. While on change in law, we may notice another aspect of the
matter.
(68) Article 13.3.1 reads as follows:
“13.3.1 If the Seller is affected by a Change in Law in accordance with Article 13.2 and
wishes to claim a Change in Law under this Article, it shall give notice to the
Procurers of such Change in Law as soon as reasonably practicable after becoming
aware of the same or should reasonably have known of the Change in Law.” CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (69) Thus, the PPA contemplates that if the seller is
affected by change in law and wishes to claim change in law, it has to notify the
procurers of the change in law as soon as is reasonably practicable after becoming
aware of the same. It may be true that on the basis of the request made by the first
respondent apparently based on the second WAPCOS report that the first respondent
has taken steps for acquiring the land needed for laying the pipeline.
It may be true that the said pipeline had to cross a greater distance. It is not as if it was on the basis
that the procurers rendered themselves liable in law or held themselves liable in law to make good
the escalation in cost. There is no such material made available indicating that the procurers have
held out that they will be liable. It is not in dispute that the first unit from the power plant was in
fact commissioned in August, 2012. In fact, when we asked as to whether a notice was given in terms
of Article 13.3.1, Shri Amit Kapur, learned counsel, could not point out to any such notice except the
notice which was given on 15.12.2012. In this regard CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. also,
we may notice the contents of the said notice:
“5.2 Additional expenditure incurred due to change in Declared Price of Land, cost of
implementation of resettlement and rehabilitation package of land, change inHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 35customs duty on mining equipment, water intake system etc.
(a) the actual expenditure incurred by SPL towards land, implementation of
resettlement and rehabilitation package of land for the project, water intakes system,
customs duty on mining equipment and excise duty on cement and steel.” (70)
Therein all that is indicated is that for the water intake the original cost was put Rs.92
crores whereas the estimated cost has been Rs.238 crores Contemporaneous with the
change in law alleged and in keeping with Article 13.3.1, there is no notice brought to
our notice.
(71) No doubt, Shri Amit Kapur, learned counsel for the first respondent, did attempt
to draw inspiration from the Minutes of the Meeting which took place on 20.03.2013
as per which the lead procurer appears to have agreed to the change. The case of Mr.
Amit Kapur, learned counsel, that the lead procurer can bind the other procurers is
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. contested by Shri M. G. Ramachandran,
learned senior counsel.
(72) We have noticed that a notice in terms of Article 13.3.1 notifying the change in
law as claimed today before the Court was not given at the relevant time.
(73) The argument that the procurers agreed to the acquisition of the land through
which the new route had to travel also does not appeal to us as firmly founding the
claim of the first respondent in law.
The matter must be viewed from the prism of the specific provisions defining the change in law and
the actual change in law which is as we have explained above. In short, being awarded a contract
and having entered into the PPA and without any basis as such in facts, the first respondent
ventured to commission a new study and acting on the same, a new pipeline corridor came on the
scene. Necessarily the cost may go up. But the question we are to decide is as to whether it is change
in law and we are of the view that it could not be a change in law as contemplated in the agreement
as it is not CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. a change in initial consent which is the only case
which has been argued in this regard. (74) The argument further is only that the estimated cost was
Rs.92 crores and a further sum in excess of the same had to be spent. In this regard, we may notice
the following clause in the PPA:
“5.2 The Site The Seller acknowledges that, before entering into this Agreement, it
has had sufficient opportunity to investigate the Site and accepts full responsibility
for its condition (including but not limited to its geological condition, on the Site, the
adequacy of the road and rail links to the Site and the availability of adequate
supplies of water) and agrees that it shall not be relieved from any of its obligations
under this Agreement or be entitled to any extension of time or financial
compensation by reason of the unsuitability of the Site for whatever reason.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 36The State Government authorities would be implementing the resettlement and
rehabilitation package (“R&R”) in respect of the Site for the Project, for which the
costs is to be borne by the Seller. The Procurers shall endeavour to ensure that the
State Government implements such R&R ensuring that land for different
construction activities becomes available in time so as to ensure that the Power
Station and each Unit is commissioned in a timely manner. Assistance of the Seller
may be sought, which he will provide on best endeavour basis, in execution of those
activities of the R&R package and as per estimated costs, if execution of such CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. activities is in the interest of expeditious
implementation of the package and is beneficial to the Project affected persons.” (75)
Moving on to the findings actually which have been rendered by the Tribunal, the
Tribunal has, in the impugned order, found that the first report of the WAPCOS is
grossly erroneous. We are at a loss to understand as to what was the basis for
rendering such a finding. Without any material, it is a little inexplicable as to how the
Tribunal could have rendered such a finding which has serious consequences as we
have noticed. This is after finding undoubtedly that there is no change in law.
Virtually, the Tribunal has brushed aside the disclaimer clauses. Before we go to the disclaimer
clauses, we may also indicate that a perusal of the first WAPCOS report indicates that it is a fairly
elaborate report. The second WAPCOS report apart from it being prepared without reference to the
procurers as we have noticed does not appear to say anything which is critical of the first WAPCOS
report. At least, there is, in fact, no express CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. whisper about
the first report. All that the second WAPCOS report seems to indicate is upon being awarded the
work, WAPCOS has gone about preparing another report. At least we are unable to find as to how
the Tribunal could on the basis of the second report find that the first WAPCOS report was grossly
erroneous. The Tribunal has not undertaken a comparative study of the two reports. There is no
discussion whatsoever of the two reports. Nor is there any other material provided to render such a
finding. The only area where we find what could perhaps be understood as a reference to the first
report is clause 4.2.2. It reads as follows:
“4.2.2. As intimated by project authority that and acquisition of pipeline corridor on
the right side of Vallabhh Pant Sagar is in the final stages and other information
gathered during site visit by WAPCOS/CWPRS team by local enquiry survey area ‘A’
was identified for detailed survey during detailed survey it is found that sufficient
depth is not available for intake well as bed level of the reservoir is around 252.5 and
this was also in a small patches. So, this area is discarded.” (76) It would appear that
the word ‘project CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. authority’ according to Shri
M.G. Ramachandran is to be understood as the first respondent. All that even clause
4.2.2 indicates is that the first respondent intimated that the acquisition for the
pipeline corridor was in its final stages and thereafter it is indicated that during the
detailed survey, it was found sufficient depth is not available.
(77) We do not think this can be the basis for acting upon the second report after
describing the first report as grossly erroneous.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 37(78) Now we may consider the disclaimer clauses.
The disclaimers have their genesis in the guidelines. Note 4 of the RFP indicates that the procurers
apart from their Directors, employees must not be treated as having made any representation or
warranting whatsoever in respect of any statements or omissions or the accuracy, completeness or
reliability of information contained therein. They were not to incur any liability under any law inter
alia even if any loss or damage is caused to the bidder by any act or omission on their part. Again
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. clause 1.4 of the RFP clearly indicated to the bidders that
the procurers inter alia do not make any representation or accept any responsibility or liability in
respect of any statements or omissions made in the water intake study report and the project report.
There is a specific disclaimer also about the accuracy, completeness or reliability of information
contained therein. This is even if any loss or damage is caused to the selected bidder by any act or
omission on their part. Thus, in respect of the water intake study report, the prospective seller or the
bidders were specifically told in no uncertain terms that any statements or omissions in water intake
study report would not result in the procurers being visited with liability even if there was loss or
damage caused to the selected bidder. This must be borne in mind at this juncture for the following
reasons.
(79) The first respondent has a case that water intake system goes to hydrology whereas in relation
to geology, the first respondent was duty bound to make its own inquiries. Since the connect
between CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. hydrology and water intake system is real and since
in regard to conditions about hydrology, the first respondent relied on the procurers or the report
prepared by a public sector unit, in particular, they should stand relieved of any obligation to
conduct any further inquiry on their own, runs the argument.
(80) We are afraid that this argument cannot hold water as the need for making more inquiry in
relation to geology cannot relieve the bidder from the operation of other clauses. A just result in the
matter of what a contract produces by way of a legal relationship must be viewed holistically on a
harmonious survey of all the relevant clauses. In any other approach, the result would have the
effect of rendering specific clauses dealing with the topic in question dead letter. In view of clause
1.4 of the RFP, in other words, the bidder was duty bound if it felt advised to check the correctness
of the report made by the WAPCOS. It could have undertaken its own study. What it did four
months after it was granted the contract and entered into the PPA, it CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. could have done before it decided to make the bid and enter into the PPA. At least we are
not shown anything which stood in the way of the bidder conducting its own study and being
convinced by the correctness of the report. We say this for the reason that what is involved is an
international competitive bid. The bidding process is the foundation for the determination of the
price in terms of section 63 of the Act. The Commission approves the rates on being convinced that
the rates are fair and competitive and arrived at on the basis of a fair bidding process. The
provisions of the RFP must, therefore, be viewed from the perspective of it placing on alert the
bidders about the imponderables which are inevitably involved in pricing process. This means that
having regard to clause 1.4 of the RFP, no bidder could possibly come forward with the claim that
the contents of the WAPCOS report must be treated as sacrosanct and infallible and that it should
not be taken without a generous pinch of salt as it stands. At least this was the message which is writHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 38large in the said CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. clause. He who acted disregarding the
caveat about the report acted at his own peril.
(81) Again, we do notice clause 2.7.2 of the RFP which we have indicated already. It contemplates
the duty on the part of the bidder to make independent inquiry and to satisfy itself with regard to
the required information, inputs, conditions, circumstances, which may affect the bid. This is apart
from the site as referred to in the PPA in clause 5.2 which we have already referred to. (82) With the
wealth of disclaimer clauses which we have noticed, we are unable to subscribe to the reasoning
adopted by the Tribunal. We are of the view that the Tribunal was wrong in brushing aside the
specific and unambiguous disclaimers under which the procurers stood exonerated from liability.
(83) One argument which we must notice at this stage is the effect of Article 13.2. We have already
adverted to Article 13.2. Article 13.2, no doubt, indicates that while determining the consequence of
change in law, the parties shall have due regard to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the
principle that the purpose of compensating the party affected by any change in law is to restore
through monthly tariff payments the affected party to the same economic position as if such change
has not occurred. We have tested the hypothesis by deliberately omitting a crucial part in Article
13.2 which are the words ‘to the extent contemplated in this Article 13’. When we read the words ‘to
the extent contemplated in this Article 13’ as part of the Article 13.2, it necessarily brings in clause
(a) and (b) of Article 13.2. In other words, what the parties have contemplated is that consequence of
change in law would result in it being addressed through the mechanism of monthly tariff payments
through supplementary bills(see Article 13.4.2). But it is to the extent as contemplated in Article
13. The question would arise as to whether the parties contemplated that it gave authority to the
competent body viz., the Commission to discard the formula which is provided in Article 13.2(a) and
(b). We are of the view that what the parties contemplated under Article 13.2 was that change in
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. law must be viewed through the specific provisions of
clauses (a) and (b). In other words, a change in law may occur during the period of construction.
Then it is to be treated as falling under Article 13.2(a). A change in law may occur during the period
of its operation. It would then appear to be dealt with under clause (b). If a change in law takes place
during the period of construction then its impact is to be measured with reference to the capital cost
of the project. The word ‘capital cost’ understandably has been defined in PPA. A formula has been
engrafted. The formula contemplates that for every increase/decrease of each Rs.50 crores in the
capital cost as a result of the change in law, the increase/decrease in the non- escalable capacity
charges is to be 0.267 per cent of the non-escalable capacity charges. No doubt, this is if the seller
provides to the procurers documentary proof of such increase/decrease in establishing the impact of
such change. (84) In other words, the effect of change in law during the construction period is
captured by CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 13.2(a). We must understand that this is a
meticulously thought through contract which emerged after a long rigorous process. Parties were
clear about how the change in law had to be compensated and methodology has been set out clearly.
Therefore, any appeal made to the general part in Article 13.2 which speaks about the affected party
being restored to the same economic condition as if such change in law had not occurred cannot
result in departing from the specific formula which has been set in place. This meaning is inevitableHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 39from the words “to the extent contemplated in this Article 13, which precedes the general words. In
this regard, we may refer to the judgment of this Court in Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. &
Anr.1. In the said judgment, it has been relied upon understandably by the first respondent also and
which also arose under the same clause (Article 13.2), this Court has held inter alia as follows:
“10. Article 13.2 is an in-built restitutionary principle which compensates 1 Uttar
Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. & Anr. v. Adani Power Limited & Ors. (2019) 5 SCC
325 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the party affected by such change in law
and which must restore, through monthly tariff payments, the affected party to the
same economic position as if such change in law has not occurred. This would mean
that by this clause a fiction is created, and the party has to be put in the same
economic position as if such change in law has not occurred i.e. the party must be
given the benefit of restitution as understood in civil law. Article 13.2, however, goes
on to divide such restitution into two separate periods.
The first period is the “construction period” in which increase/decrease of capital cost of the project
in the tariff is to be governed by a certain formula. However, the seller has to provide to the procurer
documentary proof of such increase/decrease in capital cost for establishing the impact of such
change in law and in the case of dispute as to the same, a dispute resolution mechanism as per
Article 17 of the PPA is to be resorted to. It is also made clear that compensation is only payable to
either party only with effect from the date on which the total increase/decrease exceeds the amount
stated therein.
13. A reading of Article 13 as a whole, therefore, leads to the position that subject to restitutionary
principles contained in Article 13.2, the adjustment in monthly tariff payment, in the facts of the
present case, has to be from the date of the withdrawal of exemption which was done by
administrative orders dated 6-4-2015 and 16- 2-2016. The present case, therefore, falls within
Article 13.4.1(i). This being the case, it is clear that the adjustment in monthly tariff payment has to
be effected from the date on which the exemptions given were withdrawn. This being the case,
monthly invoices to be raised by the seller after such change in tariff are to appropriately CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. reflect the changed tariff. On the facts of the present case, it is clear
that the respondents were entitled to adjustment in their monthly tariff payment from the date on
which the exemption notifications became effective. This being the case, the restitutionary principle
contained in Article 13.2 would kick in for the simple reason that it is only after the order dated
4-5-2017 [Adani Power Ltd. v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd., 2017 SCC OnLine CERC 66]
that CERC held that the respondents were entitled to claim added costs on account of change in law
w.e.f. 1-4-2015. This being the case, it would be fallacious to say that the respondents would be
claiming this restitutionary amount on some general principle of equity outside the PPA. Since it is
clear that this amount of carrying cost is only relatable to Article 13 of the PPA, we find no reason to
interfere with the judgment of the Appellate Tribunal.
19. Lastly, the judgment of this Court in Energy Watchdog v. CERC [Energy Watchdog v. CERC,
(2017) 14 SCC 80 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 133] was also relied upon. In this judgment, three issues were
set out and decided, one of which was concerned with a change in law provision of a PPA. In holdingHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 40that change in Indonesian law would not qualify as a change in law under the guidelines read with
the PPAs, this Court referred to Clause 13.2 as follows : (SCC p. 131, para 57) “57. … This being so, it
is clear that so far as the procurement of Indian coal is concerned, to the extent that the supply from
Coal India and other Indian sources is cut down, the PPA read with these documents provides in
Clause 13.2 that while determining the consequences of change in law, parties shall have due regard
to the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. principle that the purpose of compensating the party
affected by such change in law is to restore, through monthly tariff payments, the affected party to
the economic position as if such change in law has not occurred.” There can be no doubt from this
judgment that the restitutionary principle contained in Clause 13.2 must always be kept in mind
even when compensation for increase/decrease in cost is determined by CERC.” (Emphasis
supplied) (85) We are of the view that the view which we have taken does not in any way conflict
with the view which has been laid down by this Court. (86) No doubt, in Energy Watchdog2 again a
judgment which is relied upon by both the sides, the Court was dealing with a case under the Act
and has expressed the following view:
"19. The construction of Section 63, when read with the other provisions of this Act,
is what comes up for decision in the present appeals. It may be noticed that Section
63 begins with a non obstante clause, but it is a non obstante clause covering only
Section
62. Secondly, unlike Section 62 read with Sections 61 and 64, the appropriate
Commission does not “determine” tariff but only “adopts” tariff already determined
under Section 63. Thirdly, such “adoption” is only 2 Energy Watchdog v. Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others (2017) 14 SCC 80 CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. if such tariff has been determined through a transparent process
of bidding, and, fourthly, this transparent process of bidding must be in accordance
with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. What has been argued before
us is that Section 63 is a standalone provision and has to be construed on its own
terms, and that, therefore, in the case of transparent bidding nothing can be looked at
except the bid itself which must accord with guidelines issued by the Central
Government. One thing is immediately clear, that the appropriate Commission does
not act as a mere post office under Section 63. It must adopt the tariff which has been
determined through a transparent process of bidding, but this can only be done in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. Guidelines have
been issued under this section on 19-1-2005, which guidelines have been amended
from time to time. Clause 4, in particular, deals with tariff and the appropriate
Commission certainly has the jurisdiction to look into whether the tariff determined
through the process of bidding accords with Clause 4.
20. It is important to note that the regulatory powers of the Central Commission, so far as tariff is
concerned, are specifically mentioned in Section 79(1). This regulatory power is a general one, and it
is very difficult to state that when the Commission adopts tariff under Section 63, it functions
dehors its general regulatory power under Section 79(1)(b). For one thing, such regulation takes
place under the Central Government's guidelines. For another, in a situation where there are noHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 41guidelines or in a situation which is not covered by the guidelines, can it be said that the
Commission's power to “regulate” tariff is completely done away with? According to us, this is not a
correct way of reading the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. aforesaid statutory provisions.
The first rule of statutory interpretation is that the statute must be read as a whole. As a
concomitant of that rule, it is also clear that all the discordant notes struck by the various sections
must be harmonised. Considering the fact that the non obstante clause advisedly restricts itself to
Section 62, we see no good reason to put Section 79 out of the way altogether. The reason why
Section 62 alone has been put out of the way is that determination of tariff can take place in one of
two ways — either under Section 62, where the Commission itself determines the tariff in
accordance with the provisions of the Act (after laying down the terms and conditions for
determination of tariff mentioned in Section 61) or under Section 63 where the Commission adopts
tariff that is already determined by a transparent process of bidding. In either case, the general
regulatory power of the Commission under Section 79(1)(b) is the source of the power to regulate,
which includes the power to determine or adopt tariff. In fact, Sections 62 and 63 deal with
“determination” of tariff, which is part of “regulating” tariff. Whereas “determining” tariff for
inter-State transmission of electricity is dealt with by Section 79(1)(d), Section 79(1)(b) is a wider
source of power to “regulate” tariff. It is clear that in a situation where the guidelines issued by the
Central Government under Section 63 cover the situation, the Central Commission is bound by
those guidelines and must exercise its regulatory functions, albeit under Section 79(1)(b), only in
accordance with those guidelines. As has been stated above, it is only in a situation where there are
no guidelines framed at all or where the guidelines do not deal with a given situation that the
Commission's general regulatory CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. powers under Section
79(1)(b) can then be used.” (87) It is true that as far as the said case is concerned, the case arose
from claims which were made under the PPA on the basis that there were changes in law apart from
the argument that a case of Force Majeure was made out. It is not a case which actually on facts
involved the Court dealing with a case arising from the fixation of tariff under Section 63. In fact, it
arose after a PPA was approved and the rates were fixed already under Section 63. However, if we
notice the contents of para 19 and 20, the principle which the first respondent seeks to canvas before
us does not appear to emerge. The argument of the first respondent is that even de hors the terms of
the contract, there is general regulatory power available under Section 79 of the Act. There is an
overarching authority with the Commission exercising power under Section 79 which would enable
it and which would empower it to grant compensation even de hors the terms of the contract it is
contended. The argument appears to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. be that unlike
generality of contracts, a regulated contract which is a long term contract or an incomplete contract
generates space for power with the appropriate regulatory body to revisit the rates and thereby
vouchsafe a fair deal to both sides, be it a seller or the procurer.
(88) What this Court has laid down in para 19 and 20 in Energy Watchdog3 may be summarized as
follows:
(89) In the case of fixation of tariff under Section 63 of the Act, what is contemplated
is to begin with guidelines which have been issued under Section 63.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 42When the Commission is asked to exercise power under Section 63, it is beholden to the guidelines
as it cannot depart from the same. In a area where the guidelines do not occupy the field,
undoubtedly, the Commission is clothed with power as a regulatory body to act in the best interest
of all sides and to fix the tariff in a manner which is fair in the sense bearing in mind the paramount
interest of increased generation of power, the interest of the 3 Energy Watchdog v. Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others (2017) 14 SCC 80 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. consumer, as also ensuring of a fair return to the seller. So far so good. When the Commission
exercises the power under Section 63, this power is not abridged when there are no guidelines
holding the field.
(90) We are not dealing with a case where the exercise of power of the Commission under Section 63
is under review. In a case where, however, the rates are approved under Section 63 and PPA is
entered into, the question would undoubtedly arise as to whether there is a power which can be
described in a manner of speaking to be plenary power with the Commission under Section 79? Can
there be a power which can be christened as omnibus? Can the Tribunal, in other words, disregard
the express words of the contract? Can it discover a new change in law which the parties have not
contemplated as change in law? In short, can the Tribunal rewrite the contract and create a new
bargain?
(91) We are of the view that the Tribunal cannot indeed make a new bargain for the parties. The
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Tribunal cannot rewrite a contract solemnly entered into. It
cannot ink a new agreement. Such residuary powers to act which varies the written contract cannot
be located in the power to regulate. The power cannot, at any rate, be exercised in the teeth of
express provisions of the contract. (92) We notice this for the reason that the first respondent has a
case that what is provided in Article 13.2(a) (since we are dealing with the case of alleged change in
law during the construction period) does not do justice to the parties or that it is incapable of
producing a fair result and therefore, the Tribunal would necessarily be clothed with power bearing
in mind its regulatory nature. In a matter where the parties have entered into a contract with
express provisions, we are unable to agree with the first respondent that the Tribunal would have
power to disregard the express provisions of the contract on the score that as it turns out that with
passage of time and even change in circumstances, it is found that the contract cannot be worked
except at a loss for the contractor. CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (93) We may, at this
juncture, also notice an argument which has been raised by Shri Amit Kapur, learned counsel for the
first respondent, when queried as to what would be the position if a claim of the nature were
canvassed in a civil suit. The answer came that Section 18 and 19 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Contract Act’ for brevity), provided the gateway. Section 18 of the
Contract Act deals with the effect of representation or rather misrepresentation by a party made to
another party to the contract. It, undoubtedly, includes a representation, however, innocent it may
be. In other words, an innocent representation made to one party by another party which forms the
basis for consent of the person can lead to the contract becoming voidable under Section
19. It is undoubtedly true that Section 19 also contemplates that the wronged party can insist upon
the contract being performed and further, however, persevere in requiring that he be placed in the
same position if he had not been led astray by the misrepresentation. There may be no dispute aboutHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 43CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. this principle. However, we have noticed the various clauses
as contained in the disclaimer clauses. When a party to the contract states that what is contained in
the first WAPCOS report and anything else as contemplated in the RFP and the PPA does not
amount to a representation, we are unable to agree with the contention that it would still be
considered as a representation within the meaning of Section 18 and thereby leading to a claim
under Section 19 of the Contract Act. Therefore, we find that the contentions which the first
respondent seeks to raise under the provisions of Section 18 and 19 untenable.
(94) Reliance was placed on the judgment of this Court PTC India Limited v. Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (2010) 4 SCC 603. In PTC India Limited4, the actual question which arose
was as to whether the appellate Tribunal under the Act has jurisdiction under Section 111 to examine
the validity of regulations framed in exercise of power 4 PTC India Limited v. Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (2010) 4 SCC 603 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. under Section
178 of the Act. The further question which arose was whether Parliament has conferred power of
judicial review on the Tribunal under Section 121 of the Act. In the course of this judgment, the
Court inter alia held as follows:
“53. Applying the abovementioned tests to the scheme of the 2003 Act, we find that
under the Act, the Central Commission is a decision-making as well as
regulation-making authority, simultaneously. Section 79 delineates the functions of
the Central Commission broadly into two categories — mandatory functions and
advisory functions. Tariff regulation, licensing (including inter-State trading
licensing), adjudication upon disputes involving generating companies or
transmission licensees fall under the head “mandatory functions” whereas advising
the Central Government on formulation of National Electricity Policy and tariff policy
would fall under the head “advisory functions”. In this sense, the Central Commission
is the decision-making authority. Such decision- making under Section 79(1) is not
dependent upon making of regulations under Section 178 by the Central Commission.
Therefore, functions of the Central Commission enumerated in Section 79 are
separate and distinct from functions of the Central Commission under Section 178.
The former are administrative/adjudicatory functions whereas the latter are
legislative.
55. To regulate is an exercise which is different from making of the regulations.
However, making of a regulation under Section 178 is not a precondition to the
Central Commission taking any steps/measures under Section 79(1). As stated, if
there is a CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. regulation, then the measure under
Section 79(1) has to be in conformity with such regulation under Section 178. This
principle flows from various judgments of this Court which we have discussed
hereinafter. For example, under Section 79(1)(g) the Central Commission is required
to levy fees for the purpose of the 2003 Act. An order imposing regulatory fees could
be passed even in the absence of a regulation under Section 178. If the levy is
unreasonable, it could be the subject-matter of challenge before the appellate
authority under Section 111 as the levy is imposed by an order/decision-makingHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 44process. Making of a regulation under Section 178 is not a precondition to passing of
an order levying a regulatory fee under Section 79(1)(g). However, if there is a
regulation under Section 178 in that regard then the order levying fees under Section
79(1)(g) has to be in consonance with such regulation.” (95) We are unable to see how
the said judgment can advance the case of the first respondent. The question which
fell for consideration and the opinion which has been rendered do not in any way
detract from the view which we have taken.
Substantially, it was held that the making of regulation was not a pre condition for levying a
regulatory fee under Section 79(1)(g). It is no doubt true that Commission has an adjudicatory
function. It is also empowered to give opinions. CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Power to
frame regulations indicates that it also has legislative powers. The point is that since in this case we
are concerned with the adjudicatory function of the Commission, we are concerned with the
trammels to which it is subject in the form of the express terms of the contract. All that we are
holding is that in a case where the matter is governed by express terms of the contract, it may not be
open to the Commission even donning the garb of a regulatory body to go beyond the express terms
of the contract. It is apposite that we notice para 58 reads as follows:
“58. One must understand the reason why a regulation has been made in the matter
of capping the trading margin under Section 178 of the Act. Instead of fixing a trading
margin (including capping) on a case-to-case basis, the Central Commission thought
it fit to make a regulation which has a general application to the entire trading
activity which has been recognised, for the first time, under the 2003 Act. Further, it
is important to bear in mind that making of a regulation under Section 178 became
necessary because a regulation made under Section 178 has the effect of interfering
and overriding the existing contractual relationship between the regulated entities. A
regulation under Section 178 is in the nature of a subordinate legislation. Such
subordinate legislation can even override the existing contracts CIVIL APPEAL NO.
11826 OF 2018 etc. including power purchase agreements which have got to be
aligned with the regulations under Section 178 and which could not have been done
across the board by an order of the Central Commission under Section 79(1)(j).” (96)
While it may be open as indicated therein for a regulation to extricate a party from its
contractual obligations, in the course of its adjudicatory power it may not be open to
the Commission by using the nomenclature regulation to usurp this power to
disregard the terms of the contract.
(97) Another argument which has been raised on behalf of the first respondent is that
the guidelines were framed on 19.01.2005. Clauses 4.7 and 5.17 came to be, however,
modified before the PPA was entered into and even prior to the RFP and therefore,
the PPA and Article 17.3 therein has been cast in the widest terms.
(98) We have already perused Article 17.3.1.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 45Article 17.3 to begin with, speaks of specific instances which can trigger the dispute resolution
mechanism. A case in point and close to facts is a dispute arising from a change in law, after a claim
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. is denied and a resolution through settlement not being
arrived at. There are other specific clauses which are part of the PPA which are adverted to in the
later part of Article 17.3.1. Therefore, the argument is raised on behalf of the first respondent that
the opening words of Article 17.3.1 are designedly broad to cater to situations such as are
represented by the facts of this case. In other words, even irrespective of a situation being not
governed by Article 13.1 in order that the restitutionary principle or the principle of an incomplete
contract leading to a lifelong regulation assuring a fair return to the seller is observed, the power of
revisiting of the rates is what is contemplated in the amended guideline which finds enshrinement in
Article 17.3.1., it is contended. (99) In fact, when we notice the PPA, we find that apart from matters
which are expressly referred to in Article 17.3.1, viz., Articles 4.7.1, Article 13.2, Article 18.1 or clause
10.1.3 of Schedule 17, there are other Articles in the PPA with which Article 17.3.1 can bear nexus
with. They include CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. apparently, Articles 4.5.2, 11.6.6 and
11.6.7. This is besides 12.7(e) which relates to enforcement of claims under Force Majeure.
Therefore, it is not as if Article 17.3.1 is not to be understood without reference to the other parts of
the contract. No Court should attempt to read a part of the contract in isolation. The draftsman of a
contract of the nature we are dealing with would have not left any stone unturned in making the
contract one to be construed with a great sense of harmony and care. Therefore, we do not accept
the contention of the first respondent that the Commission, Tribunal and this Court must pour in
meaning into the opening words of Article 17.3.1 so that in the facts, the first respondent can claim
compensation on the basis that it has incurred expenditure acting on the first WAPCOS report.
(100) Here, we must notice finally, that substantially, the claim in regard to the water intake system
was founded on the reliance placed on the first WAPCOS report and on the strength of the second
WAPCOS report.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (101) We also find reinforcement in our view from the
following clauses 1.2.12:
“1.2.12 Different parts of this Agreement are to be taken as mutually explanatory and
supplementary to each other and if there is any inconsistency between or among the
parts of this Agreement, they shall be interpreted in a harmonious manner so as to
give effect to each part.” (Emphasis supplied) (102) An argument was raised by Shri
Amit Kapur that the contract in the case calls for the application of the principle of
contra proferentem rule.
(103) We are of the view that the principle of contra proferentem is ordinarily utilised
in contracts of insurance and standard form contracts.
(104) The principle of contra proferentem apparently in substance is that in case of
any doubt in its terms, the doubt should be resolved against the party who drafted the
contract. We would not think in the facts of this case that the first respondent has
been able to plant any serious doubt in regard to the clauses with which we areHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 46concerned with on a true understanding of the same.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (105) The second complaint- The Office Memorandum
dated 17.06.2011.
As far as the question relating to the OM dated 17.06.2011 providing the premise for change in law
claim is concerned, we are of the view that the claim may not have merit in it. It is true that Article
13.1.1 inter alia provides that a change can be brought about by the issuance of a notification by an
Indian Governmental authority. Also a change in interpretation of any law by an Indian
Governmental instrumentality inter alia provided that it is final authority under law for such
interpretation would constitute a change in law.
Indian Governmental Instrumentality is defined as follow: -
“Indian Governmental Instrumentality” means the GOI, Government of States where
the Procurers and Project are located and any ministry or department of or board,
agency or other regulatory or quasi-judicial authority controlled by GOI or
Government of States where the Procurers and Project are located and includes the
Appropriate CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Commission;” (106) Law as
defined in the PPA is as follows:
“Law” means, in relation to this Agreement, all laws including Electricity Laws in
force in India and any statute, ordinance, regulation, notification or code, rule, or any
interpretation of any of them by any Indian Governmental Instrumentality and
having force of law and shall further include all applicable rules, regulations, orders,
notifications by an Indian Govermental Instrumentatlity pursuant to or under any of
them and shall include all rules, regulations, decisions and orders of the Appropriate
Commission;
(107) While the word ‘competent Court’ which can also be the source of a change in
interpretation of any law is expressly defined in Article 13.1.1., when it comes to the
Indian Governmental instrumentality which is the final authority, is concerned, there
is no definition in the PPA. The controversy is this.
(108) The first respondent allegedly imported goods for the purpose of construction
of the captive mining plant. It is its case that the goods so imported were being used
for construction of the mining plant which was in turn was utilised for the CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. construction and operation of the ultra mega power
plant project. Such goods according to the first respondent was expressly exempted
from customs duty by virtue of the notification holding the field.
The notifications holding the field it must be understood were the notifications holding the field
before the cut off date. The cut off date admittedly is 21.07.2007. In other words, the said date is the
date which is seven days before the bid deadline. The OM which is the premise for the argument hasHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 47been issued by the Director no doubt with the approval of the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of
Power. It reads as follows:
“No. 12/20/2009-UMPP Government of India Ministry of Power Shram Shakti
Bhawan, Rafi marg, New Delhi, the 17th June, 2011 OFFICE MEMORANDUM Sub:
3960 MW Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project, Distt. Singrauli - Exemption from
Custom Duty under project Import - reg.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Govt. of Madhya Pradesh's letter No.
4468/13/2011/01 dated 24.05.2011 on the subject mentioned above and to say CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. that under Mega Power Policy, the Custom/Excise
Duty exemption is given in respect of power equipment only.
This issues with the approval of JS (Thermal), Ministry of Power (A.A. Tazir) Director Shri Mohd.
Suleman Secretary (Energy) Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal” (109) It is the contention of the first
respondent that when it imported the goods it had to pay customs duty on the same and it
constituted a change in law as the OM issued by the Joint Secretary placing the interpretation
constituted a change in interpretation.
(110) In other words, in contrast with the law as it stood before the cut off date, by the issuance of
the OM by the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power, a change in interpretation of the law is
brought about. This sufficed to found a claim of change in law within the meaning of Article 13.1.1
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (111) The argument of the procurers, on the other hand, is as
we have noticed is that the OM cannot be found to be issued by a Governmental instrumentality
which can be treated as the final authority under law for such interpretation. It is for the reason that
the notification granting exemption has been issued by the authority under the Customs Act and the
Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power is not such an authority. Secondly, it is the contention of the
procurers that the matter should have been taken before the appropriate forum by the first
respondent on the basis that in law, actually, the import of goods was exempt if it was exempt and it
was not open to the first respondent to pass on the burden without taking recourse to law. Thirdly, it
is contended that the fact of the matter is that the position even before the cut off date was that
goods in question were not exempt.
(112) Since we are dealing with the notifications, we notice that the authority on Advance Ruling has
gone into the history of the notifications and dealt with the same though in the context of the right
to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. exemption in a mega power plant but not for an ultra
mega power project. But we are of the view that as far as the history of the notifications go, it would
continue to be relevant:
“7.1 The Entry corresponding to the present Entry was introduced for the first time in
1999. As pointed out by the learned Sr. counsel for the applicant, the introduction of
this Entry in the Customs notification seems to be a follow up to the policy decision
taken by the Central Government as set out in the communication dated 10.11.1995
addressed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power, Government of India and the revisedHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 48policy/guidelines relating to Mega power projects issued in 1998. The policy
formulated in 1995 was in relation to the “setting up of power plants of capacity of
1000 MW or more supplying power to more than one state”. In that policy document,
it is stated that the “project of capacity of 1000 MW and more and catering power to
more than one state should be considered as a mega project. Projects which cater
power to a single State, irrespective of size, would not come under this category”. In
the policy which has been recast in 1998, it was decided that inter-state and
inter-regional mega power projects were to be set up both in the public and private
sectors. The re-organization of the public sector corporations was also envisaged by
the policy. The policy contemplates the beneficiary States constituting Regulatory
Commissions with powers to fix tariff. Paragraph 5 of the guidelines is important. It
says “the import of capital equipment would be free of custom duty for these
projects”. In order to ensure that domestic bidders were not adversely affected,
certain safeguards were spelt out.” CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 7.2 Entry/
Sl.No. 288A of Ch. 98.01 inserted by Notification No. 63/1999 substantially gives
effect to the 1995 policy read with revised policy of 1998. The same concept of mega
power project is to be found in that Entry. The Entry reads:
SL. Chapter/ Descripti Standa Addition Conditi No. heading/su on of rd al Duty on
No. b-head no. goods Rate rate 288 9801 Goods Nil Nil 82 A required for setting up
of any Mega Power Project specified in List33, if such Mega Power Project is-
                          a.      an
                          inter-
                          state
                          thermal
                          power
                          plant   of
                          a
                          capacity
                          of 1500MW
                          or   more;
                          or
                          b.      an
                          inter-
                          State
                          hydel
                          power
                          plant   of
                          a
                          capacity
                          of   500MW
                          or
                          more………Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 49CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Condition No. 82 is as follows: -
82. (a) If an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of
India in the Ministry of Power certifies that-
(i) the power purchasing state undertakes, in principle, to privatize distribution in all cities, in that
State, each of which having a population of more than one million within a period to be fixed by the
Ministry of Power; and
(ii) In the case of imports by a Central Public Sector Undertaking, the quantity, total value,
description and specifications of the imported goods are certified by the Chairman and Managing
Director of the said Central Public Sector Undertaking; and
(c) In the case of imports by a Private Sector Project, the quantity, total value, description and
specifications of the imported goods are certified by the Chief Executive Officer of such project”.
“7.3 List 33 specifies by name the thermal projects and hydel projects in respect of which exemption
is made applicable. Then, under Customs Notification No. 100 of 99 dated 28/7/99, the capacity of
thermal power project specified in the earlier notification was altered from 1500 to 1000 MW. As a
result of this notification, 7 more thermal projects were added to the list.” “7.4 Then, the next
notifications in succession of 2001 which are substantially the same excepting that the number of
thermal and hydel projects specified in List 33 has gone down.” “7.5 Then comes the Customs
Notification No. 21 of 2002 dated 01.03.2002 which is material for CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF
2018 etc. our purpose. It reads as follows: -
SL Chapter/ Descripti Standar Addition Conditio . heading/su on of d Rate al Duty n
No. No b-head no. goods rate .
40 9801 Goods Nil Nil 86 0 required for setting up of any Mega Power Project
specified in List42, if such Mega Power Project is-
                         a.      an
                         inter-
                         state
                         thermal
                         power
                         plant   of
                         a
                         capacity
                         of 1000MW
                         or   more;
                         or
                         b.      an
                         inter-
                         State
                         hydel
                         powerHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 50                         plant   of
                         a
                         capacity
                         of   500MW
                         or
                         more………
                         as
                         certified
                         by      an
                         officer
                         not below
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the rank of a Joint Secretary to the
Governmen t of India in the Ministry of Power “7.6 Entry 400 was amended by the
Notification No. 26/2003. The said amendment was necessitated by reason of the
policy decision taken by the Government as reflected in the Union budget speech of
203-04. The following extract from the budged speech is relevant:
“Simultaneous to the emphasis on improvement in power distribution, our attention
on capacity addition remains. The Government had earlier, in 1999, notified 18
power projected as mega projects, conferring upon them various duty and licensing
benefits. The Government now proposes to liberalise the mega power project policy
further by extending all these benefits to any power project that fulfills the conditions
already prescribed for mega power projects”.
Pursuant to the above policy, Notification No. 26/2003-Cus. Was issued amending
the notification no. 21/2002-Cus. Entry 400 as amended reads:
400 9801 Goods required for Nil Nil 86 setting up of any Mega Power Project that is
to say -
a. an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000MW CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. or more; or b. an inter-State hydel power plant of a capacity of 500MW or more……… as
certified by an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the
Ministry of Power” “7.7 The amended notification no. 21 of 2002 is almost in the same language as it
stands now (vide para 3 supra). Thus, w.e.f. 1/4/2003, the list of specified power projects has been
deleted in tune with the liberalized policy of the Government. Further, it is to be mentioned that
Entry 400 of notification no.21 of 2002 was further amended keeping in view the revised policy
guidelines issued in order to cater to the special requirements of power projects in Jammu and
Kashmir and NE States. Entry 399 substantially remained the same from 1999 onwards excepting
that there was change in the Sl. No. and the rate.” (113) The order of the Advance Ruling Authority is
dated 19.12.2008. No doubt, it is after the cut off date. The case of the first respondent is not basedHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 51on the order of the Advance Ruling Authority. The case of the first respondent is specifically based
only on the OM issued by the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power. We may notice that Joint
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Secretary in the Ministry of Power has a role in terms of the
notification. The role assigned to him is contained in condition 82 to the notification 63/1999 and
this condition has continued thereafter also. The condition as we have noticed is that it is stated that
an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary is to certify the aspects which are mentioned in
condition 82.
(114) It is difficult, in fact, to describe the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power as the
Governmental authority which is the final authority under the law. The final authority under the law
would be the authority under the Customs Act which issues the exemption notification. But we
would not wish to rest our findings on the said basis as we feel that the objection of the procurers
can rest on surer foundations. The first respondent also relies upon no doubt, the notification dated
26.05.2006 wherein it is indicated as follows:
“Notification No.49/2006-Customs In exercise of the poowers conferred by sub-
section (1) of Section 25 of the Customs Act, CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
1962 (52 of 1962), the Central Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in
the public interest to do so, hereby makes the following further amendments in the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of finance (Department of
Revenue) No.21/2002- Customs, dated the 1st March, 2002, which was published in
the Gazette of India, Extraordinary vide number G.S.R. 118(E), dated the 1st March,
2002, namely:-
(I) in the Table, against S.No.400, for the entry in column (3), the following entry
shall be substituted,namely:-
“Goods required for setting up of any Mega Power Project, so certified by an officer
not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of
Power, that is to say-
(a) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacit of 700MW or more, located in the
States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura,or
(b) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000MW or more, located in
States other than those specified in clause(a) above; or
(c) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 350MW or more, located in the
States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura,or
(d) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 500MW or more, located in
States other than those specified in Clause(C) above”, (II) in the Annexure, inHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 52Condition No.86, for sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause(A), the following shall be
substituted, namely:-
“(ii) the power purchasing State CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. undertakes,
in principle, privatize distribution in all cities, in that State, each of which has a
population of more than one million, within a period to be fixed by the Ministry of
Power.” (115) The Tribunal has, in fact, proceeded on the basis that the goods in
question would fall under Entry 400 relating to power projects and therefore, they
were exempted. The Tribunal proceeded further on the basis that the notification
dated 17.06.2011 issued by the Joint Secretary amounted to an interpretation which
constitutes a change in law.
(116) We are of the view that the approach of the Tribunal cannot be upheld. There is
no material, whatsoever, apart from the notifications to indicate that the goods in
question were being treated as exempt before the cut off date. In other words, it was
incumbent upon the first respondent to produce incontestable material establishing
that the goods were exempt and were being treated so before the cut off date. The
best material would have been examples of similar cases where goods were being
treated as exempt. Even though, it is pointed out CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018
etc. that the first respondent was the only ultra mega power plant, even then power
plants including mega power plants were operational. It is difficult to conceive that
there would not be a single case where similar inputs by way of examples of other
power projects even if it is not ultra mega power projects would not have operated for
the first respondent to draw from.
(117) The word law has been defined as we have noticed. While the expression ‘Indian
Governmental Instrumentality’ is used in the definition of the word law in Article
13.1.1, the change in interpretation of any law by an Indian governmental authority
must be the final authority under the law for such interpretation. It may be difficult
to attribute to the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power the position of an Indian
Governmental Authority who has the final authority under the law.
But as we have indicated this must not be treated as the basis on which we disagree with the
Tribunal. (118) The perusal of the OM does not advance the case of the first respondent for yet
another good reason. CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. He does not in the OM indicate that
the goods in question had been exempted before the cut off date and that the goods becoming
exigible to duty on the date after the cut off date. The Authority for Advance Ruling has categorically
affirmed that the goods of the type with which we are concerned may not qualify for exemption. The
appellants have a case that, in fact, the Joint Secretary was essentially following the Advance Ruling.
While it is true that the Advance Ruling may not bind the first respondent as it is not a party, and
the respondent could not have sought a ruling under the law, it is undoubtedly an aspect which
otherwise adds strength to the case of the appellants. There may be cases where placing the
notification holding the field before the cut off date side by side to the subsequent notification or an
interpretation issued after the said cut off date, the Commission or a Tribunal could find that thereHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 53is change in law, which added to the cost to the seller. On the other hand, when the case of the first
respondent involves interpretation of the terms of the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
notification then particularly when two views are fairly competing for acceptance before the body, at
best, we would think that the Tribunal has hazarded taking a perilous route in venturing to find that
the OM issued by the Joint Secretary constituted the change in law. Though reliance has been placed
on the judgment of this Court reported in Manohar Lal Sharma v. Principal Secretary & Ors. (2014)
9 SCC 516 and Manohar Lal Sharma v. Principal Secretary & Ors. (2014) 9 SCC 614 which decisions
purported to exempt the mining leases which were captive leases operating for the purpose of the
power projects including the power projects specifically in question from the purview of its decision,
we do not think that that by itself can determine the question as to whether the goods which were
imported for the purpose of the captive mining plant was ever exempt. What was exempt has been
goods imported for the purpose of the Power project. In other words, as to whether the goods in
question were goods which fell within one entry or the other is in this case a matter which is highly
disputed and the premise of CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the first respondent viz., the
OM of the Joint Secretary cannot be treated as being a sound foundation for making such a claim.
(119) The parties indeed contemplated a project to be constructed and operated. The word ‘project’
we find has been used in many clauses in the contract. The word ‘project’ has been defined as
follows:
““Project” means the Power Station and the Captive Coal Mine(s) undertaken for
design, financing, engineering, procurement, construction, operation, maintenance,
repair, refurbishment, development and insurance by the Seller in accordance with
the terms and conditions of this Agreement;” (120) Since the word ‘power station’ has
been used in word ‘project’, it is apposite that we advert to the definition of the words
‘power station’:
“Power Station” means the:
(a) coal fired power generation facility comprising of any or all the Units;
(b) any associated fuel handling, treatment or storage facilities of the power
generation facility referred to above;
(c) any water supply, treatment or storage facilities required for the operation of the
power generation facility referred to above;
(d) the ash disposal system including ash dyke;
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
(e) township area for the staff colony; and
(f) bay/s for transmission system in the switchyard of the power station,Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 54(g) all the other assets, buildings/structures, equipments, plant and machinery, facilities and related
assets require for the efficient and economic operation of the power generation facility; whether
completed or at any stage of development and construction or intended to be developed and
constructed as per the provisions of this Agreement.” (121) Since the word ‘captive coal mine’ has
also been referred to as part of the definition of the word ‘project’, it is only right that we advert to
the definition:
“Captive Coal Mine(s) means the captive coal mines as described in Schedule 1A and
associated fuel transport system up to the Power Station;” (122) ‘Project Documents”
again has been defined. We may also notice the definition of the words ‘Prudent
Utility Practices’:
“Project documents Mean
a) Construction Contracts;
b) Fuel mining agreements, including the Fuel Transportation Agreement, if any;
c) O&M contracts;
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
d) RFP and RFP Project Documents; and
e) any other agreements designated in writing as such, from time to time, jointly by the Procurers
and the Seller;
“Prudent Utility Practices means the practices, methods and standards that are generally accepted
internationally from time to time by electric utilities or coal mining entities for the purpose of
ensuring the safe, efficient and economic design, construction, commissioning, operation and
maintenance of coal mines and power generation equipment and mine of the type specified in this
Agreement and which practices, methods and standards shall be adjusted as necessary, to take
account of:
a) operation and maintenance guidelines recommended by the manufacturers of the
plant and equipment to be incorporated in the Project;
b) the requirements of Indian Law; and
c) the physical conditions at the Site;” (123) We have set out the history of the
notifications relating to grant of exemption for power projects. All of it began with the
policy issued in the year 1995. The exemptions had their origin with the notification
issued in the year 1999. Thereafter there is Notification 21/2002 which was issued on
01.03.2002. Entry 400 in the said notification reads as follows:Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 55CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. S.N Chapte Description Stand Additi Condi
o. r or of Goods ard onal tion Headin rate Duty no.
        g    or                                 Rate
        Sub-
        Headin
        g
400     98.01         “Goods            Nil     Nil      86
                      required for
                      setting up of
                      any        Mega
                      Power
                      Project,     so
                      certified by
                      an     officer
                      not below the
                      rank    of    a
                      Joint
                      Secretary to
                      the
                      Government of
                      India in the
                      Ministry     of
                      Power,     that
                      is to say-
                      a) an inter-
                      state thermal
                      power    plant
                      of a capacity
                      of 700 MW or
                      more, located
                      in the States
                      of Jammu and
                      Kashmir,
                      Sikkim,
                      Arunachal
                      Pradesh,
                      Assam,
                      Meghalaya,
                      Manipur,
                      Mizoram,
                      Nagaland and
                      Tripura; or
                      b an inter-
                      state thermal
                      power   plant
                      of a capacity
                      of 1000 MW or
                      more, locatedHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 56CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. in States other than those specified in clause
(a) above; or c an inter-
                    state    hydel
                    power    plant
                    of a capacity
                    of 350 MW or
                    more, located
                    in the States
                    of Jammu and
                    Kashmir,
                    Sikkim,
                    Arunachal
                    Pradesh,
                    Assam,
                    Meghalaya,
                    Manipur,
                    Mizoram,
                    Nagaland and
                    Tripura; or
                    d an inter-
                    state    hydel
                    power    plant
                    of a capacity
                    of 500 MW or
                    more, located
                    in      States
                    other     than
                    those
                    specified in
                    clause     (c)
                    above”;
(124)   Thereafter         another    notification   namely
Notification No. 26/03 which has given a final shape to it came to be issued which
has been noticed also by the Authority of Advance Ruling. It reads as follows:
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. 400 9801 Goods required for Nil Nil 86
setting up of any Mega Power Project that is to say -
a. an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000MW or more; or b. an inter-State hydel
power plant of a capacity of 500MW or more……… as certified by an officer not below the rank of a
Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Power (Emphasis supplied) (125) We
may notice that with the issuance of the said notification what stands out is the following:Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 57(126) While in the opening words of the Entry, there is reference to power project, it
is conditioned by the words ‘that is to say’. We can quite safely proceed on the basis
that Entry 400 in the Notification No. 21/2002 which came into effect on 01.03.2002
as amended by Notification No. 46/2008 is the Entry which must be treated as
holding the field as on the cut off date. It is thereafter, no doubt, that the first
respondent has invoked the change in CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. law
clause by seeking to draw inspiration from the OM issued on 17.06.2011.
(127) Change in law clause is sought to be invoked apparently contending that there has been a
change in interpretation by Indian Governmental Authority which has the final say in terms of the
law. The question which looms large before the Court is whether there has been a change in law in
terms of ‘change in interpretation’ placed by the Governmental authority with reference to the
position obtaining under the notifications issued under the Customs Act. Even the clauses in the
PPA which we have referred to maintain a distinction between a power plant and a captive mine. A
power plant cannot be treated as the same as captive mine. In fact, Schedule 1A which defines the
site refers to the captive mines in terms of the coal blocks which are allotted. The definition of
captive mine also indicates that it is the coal mines as described in Schedule 1A and the associated
fuel transport system up to the power station. No doubt, the word ‘site’ has also been defined as the
land CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. over which the Project will be developed as provided in
Annexure 1A.
(128) Undoubtedly, in view of the very purpose of having a coal mine which is to supply the requisite
fuel for the operation of the power plant, there would be a certain measure of geographical
contiguity. But the question for the consideration before this Court is whether that would decide the
fate of the contents of a notification issued under the Customs Act.
(129) We must notice that it is not as if the first respondent is the only person which had a right to
claim the benefit of exemption on the basis that the goods which have been imported for the
purpose of their captive mine must be treated as goods used in the power project. As the history of
the notifications as captured in order of the Advance Ruling Authority would show over a period of
time, there have been a number of power plants which have sprung up. All of them would also be
using captive mines for the purpose of generating power. It is not as if there would be a dearth of
examples of CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. exemption being extended to imports made by
them and claiming the benefit of exemption under the notification. Not a single instance of an
exemption granted to any other project where goods imported for use in the captive mine has been
produced before the Commission, the Tribunal or even this Court. This goes a long way to negate the
claim of the first respondent that what was once exempt has ceased to be exempt only by virtue of
the issuance of the OM dated 17.06.2011.
(130) There is another very important circumstance which strikes us. The material which appeals to
us is to be found undoubtedly in the order of the Advance Ruling Authority relied upon by the
appellant. The application, no doubt, is filed in the year 2008. What impresses the Court the most is
the stand of the customs authorities before the Advance Ruling Authority. We cannot proceed on the
basis that the controversy which led to the seeking of the ruling and far more importantly theHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 58persistent stand of the customs authority before the Advance Ruling Authority would not shed light
on how CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. the Department viewed the matter. This is
important as it is the customs department which has issued the exemption notification. Being the
authors of the notification, they would be best placed to understand the width and purport of a
notification granting exemption. They have stoutly opposed the application and laid out various
grounds which, no doubt, has appealed also to the Advance Ruling Authority. This is an aspect
which goes a long way to show that the view of the customs authority which in a manner of speaking
can also be viewed as forming contemporanea expositio should not be ignored by this Court.
(131) The first respondent also sought considerable reliance in this regard from the Mega Power
Projects: Revised Policy Guidelines. The relevant portions reads as follows:
“MEGA POWER PROJECTS: REVISED POLICY GUIDELINES The following
conditions are required to be fulfilled by the developer for grant of mega project
status:-
a) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 700 MW or more, located in the
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura;
or
b) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000 MW or more, located in
States other than those specified in clause (a) above; or
c) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 350 MW or more. located in the
States of Jammu and Kashmir. Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya.
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura: or
d) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 500 MW or more, located in
States other than those specified in clause (c) above' Fiscal concessions/benefits
available to the Mega Power Projects Zero Customs Duty: In terms of the notification
of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance(Department of Revenue) No.
21/2002-Customs dated 18 March, 2002 read May, 2006. the import of capital
equipment would be free of customs duty for these projects.” (132) The
understanding of the Authority for Advance Ruling appears to be that as far as the
entitlement to exemption under the notification is concerned a mega power project
has to be understood as confined to what follows after the words ‘that is to say’. In
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. other words, though the use of the words
power project in entry 400 would appear to suggest that it is capable of embracing
within its scope a captive mine from which the fuel is generated to run the power
plant, when it came to the actual beneficiary of entry 400, the maker of the
notification has confined the exemption to the goods for the purpose of the power
plant. In other words, the word power project has been conflated with the power
plant.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 59This appears to be the soul of the reasoning of the Advance Ruling Authority. While we are aware
that the first respondent is not bound by the said Ruling as it is not a party, we do not find it
erroneous on our part in finding merit in the logic of the same or adopting the same for the purpose
of deciding the question which squarely arises before this Court viz., whether there is a change in
law. (133) There is also merit in the contention of the appellant that for article 13.1.1 to be
successfully invoked by the seller, it must demonstrate that there was an interpretation earlier to or
as on the date of the cut off date which was advantageous to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc.
the seller and there has been a change in the said interpretation after the cut off date. (134) In other
words, the OM issued with the approval of the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Power does not
indicate that it is a case of a change in interpretation. He does not say that the position adumbrated
in the OM represents a shift or a change from what the position was prior to the cut off date. This is
apart from any material being available to show that there was an interpretation in favour of the first
respondent prior to the cut off date.
(135) We reiterate that no instance of exemption to goods of similar nature being imported by any
person for the captive mine as part of a power project be it mega or ultra mega plant is placed before
the Commission. It is one thing to say that in a popular sense and it could be urged and it may be
true that the word project has been defined in the PPA as power plant and the captive coal mine, but
as we have noticed this is a matter to be determined on what was intended by the author of the
notification CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. under Section 25 of the Customs Act and the
matter is to be further determined with reference to the express terms of the Notification. Even
more importantly, the question must fall to be decided with reference to the interpretation available
prior to the cut off date and after cut off date. The communication, which is the OM dated
17.06.2011 relied upon by the first respondent appears to have been issued on the basis of the
request made by the first respondent to the State of Madhya Pradesh. (136) Shri Amit Kapur,
learned counsel on behalf of the first respondent drew our attention to Entry 78 of notification No.
21/02 dated 1.3.2002. Entry 78 reads as follows:
Sr. Chapter Descriptio Standard Additional Condition No. or n of goods rate rate No.
Heading or sub-
heading
78. 2714.90 All goods, - Nil -
                        for     the
                        purpose of
                        power
                        generationHaryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 60CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (137) Shri Ramchandran, learned senior
counsel, would point out that the said Entry relates to inputs for power generation.
The case of the first respondent is also that Entry 399 actually specifically deals with
the goods required for coal mining project under which the first respondent has been
visited with customs duty.
(138) The argument of Shri Amit Kapur is that first of all, Entry 78 if contrasted with Entry 400
would show that all goods needed for a power project understood in a larger sense as including a
captive coal mine would also come within four walls of Entry
400. (139) Shri Amit Kapur, learned counsel, would point out that captive coal mine envisaged as
such is one where the entire production of coal is to be utilised for the power plant in question which
also would indicate that it is part of the power project. It is not in dispute that whatever may be the
distinction which may exist between a mega power project, an ultra mega power project (we are
concerned with latter), there is no separate CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. notification
under the Customs Act which deals with ultra mega power project.
(140) The upshot of the above discussion is that we are of the view that the first respondent has not
been able to demonstrate that there was a change in law as contemplated in Article 13.1.1 by
issuance of the OM dated 17.06.2011.
RELIEF (141) The three procurers who were respondents before the Tribunal have not chosen to file
appearance before this Court. The lead procurer has filed an appeal before this Court. Further, there
is only one PPA. Ironically, decisions relating to Order XLI Rule 21 and Rule 33 have been placed
before this Court by the first respondent reminding this Court of the power available to it. No doubt,
they placed this position in an attempt at salvaging the situation arising from no appeal have been
filed by it challenging the finding relating to there being no change in law in regard to the water
intake system.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (142) In the facts of this case, we also notice that the three
non-filing parties are respondents in the appeals filed by the appellants. We also cannot be
unmindful of the argument of Shri P. Chidambaram and others that if the first respondent had a
case that they were entitled to an exemption under the situation extant prior to the cut off date then
proper remedy would be to seek refund on the basis that they have been illegally visited with
customs duty.
(143) In the facts of this case, we feel that the interest of justice do require that the impugned order
be set aside not only as against the appellants but also as against the three non- appellants. In the
nature of the litigation, we would think that the benefit of this order should be vouchsafed to the
three respondents also, viz., (1) respondent No. 12(BSES Rajdhani Power Limited); (2) respondent
No. 13 (BSES Yamuna Power Limited); and (3) respondent No. 15(Uttarakhand Power Corporation
Limited). Apparently, these respondents have not contested the appeals.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 61CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. (144) As we have noticed in the beginning as a sequel to the
impugned order, the Commission has passed orders allowing the claim relating to the water intake
system whereas it has rejected the prayer relating to change in law flowing from OM dated
17.06.2011. The affected parties have carried the matter to the Tribunal in appeals. It is brought to
our notice that this Court passed an order of stay dated 25.11.2019. Since the appellants have
challenged the order of the Tribunal, the subsequent order by the Commission can only be treated as
a consequential order and therefore, it may not have any independent legs to stand on. The
appellants must be given the fruits of the decision which ultimately is rendered in their favour, as we
are rendering this judgment.
(145) Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned order is set aside. The order will enure to
the benefit also of the three respondents also, viz., (1) respondent No. 12(BSES Rajdhani Power
Limited); (2) respondent No. 13 (BSES Yamuna Power Limited); and (3) respondent No.
15(Uttrakhand Power CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11826 OF 2018 etc. Corporation Limited). Equally, the
order passed by the Commission consequent upon the remand under the impugned order cannot
survive. The appeals filed will also lose their force and it is for the appellants to do the needful to
bring it to an end in the light of this judgment.
The parties will suffer their own costs.
………………………………………………………., J.
[ K.M. JOSEPH ] ………………………………………………………., J.
[ B.V. NAGARATHNA ] New Delhi;
April 06, 2023.Haryana Power Purchase Centre vs Sasan Power Ltd on 6 April, 2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48431768/ 62