eee OS SN Sa
Wee NAR SAA = (NN

Sep (5 afrerars TAMILNADU BW 348713

Po gcc 2019 oR. LAKSHMANAr
ie STAMP. VENDOR

bal” . . L. C. No: 6/772/83/9
; A ‘, : No: 261, E.V.R. ROAC

AMINJIKARAI, CHENNAI-2:

TAC SEAWAYS LLP |

4
This LLP Agreement made at Chennai on Wednesday, the 97
E September, 2019 between the following (hereinafter collectively
+ referred to as Partners to LLP Agreement).

|. CHAKKARAVARTHY ELLUKHAN, S/o. RAVANAIAH
ELLUKHAN, aged about 61 years, residing at NO 287/7,
RAGHAVAN. STREET, AYYAVOO COLONY, AMINJIKARAI,
CHENNAI — 600 029, Tamil Nadu.

2. ANANDPODDAR, S/o Mr. RAJKUMAR, aged about 36 years,
residing at No.17/33, BASHYAKARLU NAIDU STREET, ’
KONDITHOPE, CHENNAI - 600079, Tamil Nadu.

and
3. ABIRAMI, D/o Mr. ARJUNAN, aged about 32 years, residing at

W268. 3RD AVENUE. C SECTOR, 12" STREET, ANNA NAGAR WEST |
EXTENSION, CHENNAI - 600101, Tamil Nadu.

Effective Date of LLP Agreement: this agreement shall be effective
from the date of incorporation of LLP.

Loe ed, — Lf
— oa 7. = Do hie
Ld

SG afters TAMILNADU BW 348714

tac Seaweye COP esi awe
R. LAKSHMANANW
STAMP VENDOR
L.C. No: 6/772/B3/96

No: 261, E.V,R, ROAD,
AMINJIKARAI, CHENNAI-29.

[2]

Whereas :

A. The Parties to LLP Agreement have decided and agreed to
incorporate a Limited Liability Partnership known as TAC
SEAWAYS LLP.

B.:The proposed name was reserved by the Registrar of
Companies.

C. The Incorporation Document for LLP was executed by all
_the parties to LLP agreement.

D. The Incorporation Document and other connected papers
shall be submitted to Registrar of Companies with
necessary filing fees. :

Now, therefore, it is decided and agreed by all parties to LLP
agreement as follows:

1. BUSINESS OF LLP

The business of LLP as specified in the Incorporation Document
(Form No.2) ,
etc
¥

Tac, Seaway e CCP ek LaKSHMANA!
STAMP VENDOR
L. C. No: 6/772/B83/9

5 At
No: 261 E.VR. RO
, AMINJIKARA!, CHENNAT-

1.1.Main Objects:
* The business of the TAC SEAWAYS LLP shall be

:
b
P (3)
d
E
1. To establish, organize, manage, run, charter, conduct,
contract, develop, handle, own, operate and to do business as
fleet carriers, transporters, in all its branches on water, land,
i air and space for transporting passengers, goods, articles, or
things on all routes and lines on National and International
; level subject to law in force through all sorts of carries like
ships, vessels, boats, barges, cruise liners, steamers, trucks,
lorries, trawlers, dumpers, coaches, tankers, tractors, haulers,
‘ jeeps, trailers, motor buses, omnibuses, motor taxies, railways,
7 tramways, aircrafts, hovercrafts, rockers, space shuttles, and
so on whether propelled by petrol, diesel, electricity, steam oil,
F atomic power or any other form of power.
|
4]

2. To carry on the business as agents, distributors, merchants,
importers, exporters, traders, contractors, warehousemen and
to establish, maintain, operate and/or run agency lines in
goods, stores, consumable items, durable merchandise,
chattels and effects of every kind and description in any place
in the world and without limiting the generality of the above, to
carry on business as Selling Agents, Buying Agents, Factors,
Mukadams, Carriers, Jath Merchants, Landing Clearing and
Forwarding Agents, Commission Agents, Insurance Agents,
Distributors and Stockiest, Brokers and/ or in any other

capacity.

3. To carry on the business of clearing and forwarding agents,
courier and cargo handlers, handling and haulage contractors,
warehousemen, common carriers by water, land, rail, and air
container agents, to handle goods and passengers within the
country and outside and to carry on the business of tour and
travel operators and to act as customs agents, wharfingers,
landing agents, stevedores and longshoremen.

4. To carry on the business of ship builders and repairs and re-
fitters and vendors of ships, and vessels and or repairers of
engines, boilers, machinery and any other parts required for
ships and vessels and to instruct and maintain for the use of
the company repairing or docking of ships and other vessels
and to aid in or contribute to the construction of any such
works.

1.2.Incidental or ancillary powers:

Following powers shall be incidental or ancillary to attainment
of main business of LLP as indicated in Incorporation
Document. LLP can exercise those powers as and when
required.

(a) Obtaining, rights, privileges, contracts, licenses, intellectual
property rights, authorizations, permissions from
Government or any other authority, company or person to
carry out the business of LLP.

(b) Take over any running firm, concern, LLP or body Corporate
carrying on similar business at a price mutually agreeable
or to amalgamate with any other LLP or company or body
corporate having objects similar or compatible to those of

the LLP. .
x LAK

[Bards init
5}

(c) Enter into arrangement for sharing profits, union of
interest, cooperation or joint venture with any person, LLP
or Company or Body Corporate.

(d) Appoint, deal with or act as agents, sub agents, dealers,
distributors for selling or purchasing or dealing with the
products or services related to the business of LLP.

(e) Do all such acts and things as may be necessary to carry
out the business of LLP

1.2 Change, Suspension or modification in nature of Business

The nature of Business can be changed or new business can be
commenced or existing business can be suspended or modified
or business can be completely closed with consent of all the
partners.

2. Duration of LLP

The duration of LLP shall be at Will. The LLP will have
perpetual succession, unless LLP is wound up or stuck off as
defunct.

3. Contribution

A. The contribution of LLP shall be as_ specified in the
Incorporation Document. The contribution of partners can be
increased with consent of all the partners.

B. Share of each partner in Contribution: The share of each
partner in the Contribution will be as decided with consent of
all the partners.

C. Refund of Contribution: The Contribution of partner will not be
refundable except
(a) in case of Death, Resignation, Expulsion, Cessation and or

for any other reason of the partner or (b) winding up of LLP

E. Refund of Contribution in case of Closure of Business: When it
is decided that business of LLP be closed, all secured and
unsecured creditors should be first paid. All liabilities of LLP
shall be cleared. Balance, if any, shall be distributed among
partners in the relation of their contribution at the time of
closure of Business.

=e — oe ~ LAK
F.

{6}

The initial Contribution of the TAC SEAWAYS LLPshall be
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lacs Only) which shall be
contributed by the partners in the following proportions. (as
per Form 2)

ANANDPODDAR 40% of Rs.10,00,000/- 4,00,000/-
CHAKKARAVARTHYE 30% of Rs.10,00,000/- 3,00,000/-

ABIRAMI 30% of Rs.10,00,000/- 3,00,000/-

we wee wee we

Total 10,00,000/-

If any partner advance any sum of money to the partnership
firm over and above their due contribution to the capital, the
same shall be debit due from the LLP to the partner advancing
the same and shall carry simple interest at the rate of 12% per
annum or any other rate as decided the partners unanimously.
Similarly if the firm advances any sum to any partners shall be
debit due from the partner to the LLP and shall carry simple
interest at the rate of 12% per annum or any other rate as
decided by the partners unanimously. Payment or receipt of
interest on advance to or from partners will be decided
mutually among all the partners from time to time.

Types of Partners

Partners shall be of following types

1. Executive Partner/Designated Partner
2. Non Executive Partner /Partner

Executive Partner /Designated Partner: Executive
Partner/Designated Partner shall devote sufficient time as may
be required for the purpose of business of LLP.

Mutual Rights and Duties of Partners of LLP
Besides the rights and duties specified elsewhere in this LLP

Agreement, following shall be mutual rights and duties of
partners of LLP

Reel Fes _“
{7]

(a) the LLP shall indemnify each partner in respect of
payments made and personal liabilities incurred

1. in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business of
the limited liability partnership: or

2. in or about anything necessarily done for the
preservation of the business or property of the LLP

(b) Each Partner shall indemnify the LLP for any loss caused to
it by his fraud in the conduct of the business of LLP

(c) Each partner shall render true accounts and full
information of all things affecting the LLP to LLP, Executive,
Designated partners.

(d) If a partner, without the consent and/or knowledge of the

LLP, carried on any business of the same nature as and

competing with the LLP, he shall account for and pay over

to the LLP all profits made by him in that business.

Every partner shall account to the LLP for any benefit

derived by him without the consent of the Limited Liability

Partnership from any transaction concerning the LLP, or

from any use by him of the property, name or any business

connection to LLP

(f) Any partner shall not divulge business information, trade
secrets or confidential information of LLP to any outsider,
except where required by the any law in force.

(g) Every partner shall make adequate disclosure of his direct
or indirect interest in any contract, business deal or
arrangement with the LLP by or with any person, firm, LLP,
company or other body corporate.

(e

ae

6. Management of LLP

Every partner will take part in management of LLP.

6.1General powers to Executive /Managing Partners

Without prejudice to the generality of powers exercisable by
executive/managing partners, the  executive/managing
partners may with the written consent of the other partner(s)
do the following acts:

(a) Borrow in ordinary course of business and repayment of loans.
(b) Sale or dispose of movable or immovable property in ordinary
course of business.

a Qs x fe
[8]

(c) Transfer immovable property belonging to the LLP.

(d) Purchase and sale goods for business of LLP.

(e) Employ and remove employees and fix their remuneration,
perquisites and terms and conditions of employment.

(f) Receive payments on behalf of LLP and giving receipt.

(g) Pledge/hypothecate/mortgage goods of LLP for borrowing
money.

(h) Settling accounts with persons dealing with the LLP.

(i) Making, drawing, accepting and endorsing a Negotiable
Instrument on behalf of LLP.

(j) Institute and defend a suit and withdraw a suit or proceedings
filed by or on behalf of the LLP or enter into compromise.

(k) Appoint Advocate or legal representative or authorized
representative to institute suit by LLP or defend suit or any
legal proceedings against LLP.

(l) Receive notice on behalf of LLP.

(m) Acknowledging debt of the LLP.

(n) Submit a dispute relating to the business of the LLP to
arbitration.

(o) Opening and Operating of a banking account in name of LLP.

(p) Compromise or relinquish any claim or portion of a claim by
the LLP.

(q) Admit any liability in a suit or proceedings against the LLP.

(r) Give guarantees, loans and make investments in ordinary
course of business.

(s) Delegate powers either through authority letter or by executing
general or special power of attorney in favor of delegate.

6.2 Decisions in relation to LLP
All routine decisions will be taken by Managing Partner.

Major decisions relating to business will be decided by consent
of all the partners. It will be sufficient if consent of partners is
obtained through circular resolution without calling for meeting
of partners. Except the following decisions:

(a) Admission of new partner.

(b) Expelling a partner.
(c) Shifting of registered office outside state.
(d) Sale, merger, amalgamation or closure of entire business of

(e) Change in nature of business of LLP.
() Voluntary winding up of LLP.

eh —-_ x Lee
|e Qu

[9]

The aforesaid decisions can be taken only at meeting of
partners. Any other decision can be taken either by calling a
meeting or through circular resolution or through formal or
informal communication.

Notice for Meetings: Meetings will be convened with notice of
seven days. This period can be reduced by consent of all the
partners.

Quorum for the meeting shall be minimum of 2 partners
personally attending or 1/3 of total partners whichever is less.

A partner can attend the meeting either in person or proxy. The
meeting will elect its own Chairman. Chairman shall have a
casting vote.

Minutes of meeting - Decisions taken at the meeting of
partners shall be recorded in the minutes within thirty days of
taking such decisions and shall be kept and maintained at the
registered office of the LLP.

No Common Seal.

LLP shall not have common seal. Where any authority, Bank or
Financial Institution requires common seal, the document shall
be signed/executed by any two partners of LLP.

Such documents duly signed will be binding on the LLP for all
legal purposes.

Bank accounts

LLP may open and operate any bank account. The account may
be operated by any one of the designated partners or such
other partners or persons as may be decided by the partners at
their meeting and resolution passed by them.

Borrowings

LLP shall borrow any money from any Bank, Financial
Institution, NBFC, Finance Company or any other person. The
borrowing may be secured or unsecured.

. LA
[10}

10. Share of Profit and Loss.

The share of profit and loss of each partner will be as follows

1. ANANDPODDAR 40%
2. CHAKKARAVARTHY ELLUKHAN 30%
3. ABIRAMI 30%
100%
11. Admission of partner

A person will be admitted to LLP as any type of partner with
Consents of all partners

12. Designated Partners
Following are designated partners.

1. ANANDPODDAR
2. CHAKKARAVARTHY ELLUKHAN
3. ABIRAMI

The designated partners shall be responsible for all acts
specified in section 8(a) of Limited Liability Partnership Act.
Appointment/removal of designated partners will be done with
Unanimous of all the partners.

13. Expulsion of partner

A partner can be expelled by unanimous decision by all the
remaining partners. However, partner who is having affirmative
note cannot be expelled or

It will not be necessary to make any specific allegation against

the partner proposed to be expelled or state any reason for
expulsion of partner.

The partner proposed to be expelled shall be provided
reasonable opportunity to state his case, if he so desires.

An expelled partner shall be entitled to all the benefits as are

available to a retiring partner.
[eer As x LAK
(11)

However, if he is being expelled for reasons of fraud or
misappropriation or criminal negligence, he shall not be
entitled to any retirement benefits, if specific resolution to that
effect is passed in meeting of partners.

14. Loans to LLP from partners

LLP may obtain loans from its partners. The acceptance of such
loan and rate of interest on the loans will be determined
unanimously by all partners

15. Loans by LLP to partners.

LLP may grant loans to its partners. The giving of such loans
and interest chargeable on the loans will be determined
unanimously by all partners.

16. Accounts

Financial year of LLP shall end on 31% March every
year.Accounts shall be maintained on mercantile basis.

17. Audit of Accounts.

Where accounts are required to be audited by practicing
Chartered Accountant, auditor will be appointed by designated
partners. Their remuneration will be fixed by them.

If audit by practicing Chartered Accountant not required -
when audit of accounts of LLP by practicing Chartered
Accountant is not required under any law, designated partners
may appoint any person who, in their opinion, has sufficient
knowledge of accounting, to prepare and check accounts of
LLP.

Adoption of Audited accounts not required — copy of audited
account shall be furnished to each partner within 30 days after
accounts are ready and audited. For removal of doubts, it is
clarified that approval or adoption if accounts by partners
either at meeting or otherwise is not required.

pee = as gb
[12]

18. Cessation of a partner

A partner can resign from LLP. A partner will cease to be
partner on his death or if he is declared mentally ill by

component authority.He will also cease to be partner if he is
expelled.

On cessation of person as partner, his contribution will be
refunded. His share of goodwill will be paid to him. Value of
goodwill shall be as determined by auditors of LLP.

No goodwill will be paid in following cases-(a) A person who was
a partner for less than five years (b)Salaried partner,
irrespective of number of years of his partnership(c) If a partner
declines to agree to non-compete agreement as detailed below.

19. Non compete agreement

Goodwill shall be paid to a partner only if he agrees in writing
not to compete with LLP in its business and not to poach its
customers for two years from cessation as member.For removal
of doubts, it is clarified that the goodwill amount paid to
partner shall be the consideration for non-compete agreement.

20. Secrecy provisions, non-disclosure, confidentially

A partner while working as partner of LLP and for two years
after he ceases to be a partner, shall not disclose any trade
secret or confidential information obtained during his
association with LLP so as to harm commercial interest of LLP,

except when required under any law.

21. Resolution of Disputes between partners

Disputes among partners and disputes between partners and
LLP will be settled through conciliation, first by remaining
partners and then by auditors of LLP.

22. Arbitration

Following will apply to disputes between partners other than
those stated above and disputes between LLP and partner.

is ae AY x Lf
[13]

All disputes, claims and difference whatsoever arising between
the parties out of or relating to the construction, meaning and
operation or effect of this LLP Agreement or breach, termination
or invalidity thereof, will be settled in accordance with
provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and the
award made in pursuance thereof shall be binding upon the
parties. The seat of arbitration shall be at Chennai.

23. Jurisdiction of Courts

All disputes arising out of this deed shall be subject to
territorial jurisdiction of the Courts at Chennai only.

This LLP agreement executed and signed by partners as stated
below at place as mentioned in opening paragraph of this

agreement.
NAME AND SIGNATURE
& AWK
* Qo sc £
—
ANANDPODDAR CHAKKARAVARTHY E ABIRAMI
Witnesses

1.
CE VOnvKATeESN )
6. ELLAIAY NAIDU
y- 4S, Bep STREET,

» Cee

CB. Verner Te Hx )
Ye. PAA Kets UNAM,
Sven net _ Boro3o.

Date : 09.10.2019
Place : CHENNAI
